How to Host a FREE Website on Google Cloud (Step-by-Step) - YouTube
Tony Teaches Tech

You can host your own website on Google Cloud for
free and I'll show you how step by step, even if
you never worked with cloud servers before. We'll
create a virtual machine on Google Cloud's always
free tier. Install Docker, set up Caddy and get
your website live on a custom domain with HTTPS.
Don't worry about hidden charges. I'll break down
the limits so you can stay completely free. And by
the end of the video, you'll have a secure website
on a cloud server that you can experiment with and
make your own. So, let's get started. Okay, so get
yourself over to cloud.google.com. You will need
a credit card to sign up. But like I said, don't
worry. I will go over the limits so you can stay
within them later on in this video. But first,
let's go to your Google Cloud Console by clicking
this button up here and then this hamburger menu
in the upper lefthand corner. Click that. Come
down to Compute Engine and then Overview. And
we'll get out of here. And then we want to click
on this box that says Create Instance. And now
if this is your first time using Google cloud,
you'll probably see something here about enabling
the Compute Engine API. So go ahead and do that.
And once you've done that, we can configure our
virtual machine. Now you should be aware that uh
there and I'll have this linked below. There
are these specific parameters, these specific
specifications that we need to stay within uh
when we configure our virtual machine, so that
way it's always free every month to month. So
as you can see here, we have to pick an E2 Micro
machine in one of these data centers. So let's
go ahead and start with that. And I'll just keep
this up on the screen here so we can reference
it throughout the video. Um, for the region,
um, US Central 1 in Iowa is one of those. So,
I'm just going to keep that. And then as far
as the machine type, we need an E2 type machine.
And then specifically, we want a e2-micro, which
is going to give us uh that two virtual CPUs and
1 gigabyte of memory. Let's move on to the OS and
storage and click this change button. And a lot of
these operating systems are free and open source,
so you can choose whichever one you like. Um,
I'm going to pick Ubuntu because I prefer that.
And we're going to pick specifically the latest
long-term support version, which is Ubuntu 24.04
LTS. And be careful, uh, because our machine is
an Intel processor. We don't want the the ARM
version here. We want the x86/64 version. So,
let's click on that. And then, as you can see,
we can get up to 30 GB of SSD storage for free as
part of the always free tier. So, we'll pick that.
And we want to make sure that for the boot disc
type, we have a standard persistent disc as it
says in the specifications. And then we can select
that. Let's go to data protection next. And we
will disable backups just because that they could
potentially incur an additional fee. And then
under networking, we want to enable HTTP and HTTPS
traffic. And I do want to point out down here,
I know there's a lot of confusion. If you expand
the network interface, um you might think that
if you upgrade your uh network service tier from
premium to standard, you'll get 200 gigabytes of
uh bandwidth per month. But that's actually
not the case. This option is only relevant if
you have a paid virtual machine through Google
Cloud. What we are limited to, as the specs say,
is one gigabyte of outgoing traffic per month.
We'll talk a little bit more about this later.
It does seem limiting, but there are ways around
this with something like um a CDN or whatnot,
but for now, just keep the premium network service
tier enabled. Under observability, we disable the
install ops agent for monitoring and logging.
Again, that could incur a fee. It is free to
enable, but we're just going to avoid that. And
then under security, um, we do not want a service
account. And I don't think there's anything
under advanced that we're going to enable here.
Actually, if you do go down to provisioning model,
make sure that you have standard selected as
opposed to spot. Spot is the preempted version and
we need the non-preemptable VM. So, just make sure
you have standard and you should be good to go.
Uh, but at that point, we have a monthly estimate
that's around $7.31. Yours might look a little
bit different depending on how many days are in
the current month that you're enabling this.
Uh, but like I said, we get two virtual CPUs,
1 GB of memory, 30 GB of solid state storage. And
um, I I will put this in the linked blog post just
so you guys can be 100% sure that you are enabling
a always free tier compatible virtual machine. So,
they have this command line equivalent code and
I'll I'll put what mine looks like and you can
compare them side by side. Unfortunately, there's
no way you can paste this in unless you actually
do the command line. But this is what you your
configuration needs to look like. And if that is
the case, we can go ahead and create our virtual
machine. So, go ahead and click on create. And
that'll just take a couple minutes here. When that
finishes, I'll catch back up with you. All right,
our virtual machine is up and running. As you can
see here, it says this instance is running. So,
let's connect to it. And we can do that via SSH.
There's a couple different options. We're just
going to do SSH in a browser window. So, that'll
open up this one. And you'll see this popup that
says allow SSH in browser to connect to VM. So,
click on authorize. And you'll have to authorize
that through your Google account when the first
time you do this. So, go ahead and do that. And
then we'll click on continue. All right. And now
we are logged into that virtual machine in that
remote data center in Iowa in my case. And what we
want to do is install Docker. So, we're going to
set up a a website via Docker. And we can install
Docker with this command right here. And don't
worry, I'll have all of these commands linked on
my website. Um, so you can just copy and paste
from there. So, what that does is download this
get-docker.sh script. And what we want to do is
run that. So, we can do a sudo sh get-docker. And
if you're not familiar, you can tab complete to
not type out every single letter. Hit enter. And
that's going to go ahead and install Docker and
Docker Compose. All right, that has finished. So,
we have Docker and Docker Compose installed. And
uh the last thing I'm going to do is add
our user. In my case, Tony, the Tony user,
which I think does come from your Google account,
the name on your Google account. But anyway, we
want to add that user to the Docker group. So that
way, we don't have to type pseudo every time. So,
let's do that. And now for those changes to take
effect, let's just exit out of our SSH session by
typing exit. And then we can come back in the same
way that we did before. So open in a new browser
window. And we won't have to re-authenticate
with Google this time. That was just a once and
done thing. All right. And we are back on our
SSH session. And what we're going to do is set
up the most basic Caddy website possible. We're
just going to set up a Docker Compose file. So,
let's go make a directory called site. And
we'll go into that directory. And there's
nothing in here obviously, but let's make
a file in there called docker-compose.yml.
And in here, um, let's again paste this from my
website. We are going to define a service. Uh,
we're going to pull down the Caddy image and
we're going to just call it caddy_demo. There
is an underscore there. It's not really showing
up that well. Um but we're going to expose ports
um 80 and 443 which is HTTP and HTTPS. So to get
out of here control X, capital Y, hit enter. And
now we can do a docker compose up -d. Dash d
is damon mode so it runs in the background.
And that's going to go ahead and pull down that
docker container and start it up. We can confirm
that with docker compose ps to see the the list of
processes. And um as you can see here it is up and
running. So now at this point we are technically
serving a website over the internet. And let's
test that out. So let's minimize this. Uh we have
this IP address. Not this one. Not internal. The
external IP address um that we can go to in a
web browser. And the reason this is happening,
basically when you click on this link over here
it's taking you to an HTTPS version of your
website. And we don't have that enabled yet. So,
let's make sure we're explicitly going to http:///
the IP address. Hit enter. When you do that,
you should see the default Caddy landing page.
All right. So, this is cool and all, but it is uh
not secure. And it doesn't have a domain name. So,
at this point, what we want to do is associate a
domain name that we own with this IP address. And
if you don't have a domain name, go ahead
and get one. There's a bunch of different
places. I'll have something linked below for my
recommendation. Um, I have uh my domain names,
some of them registered with Netim right now and
we're going to use this one for the demo today,
loolanta.org. So, wherever you registered your
domain name, go there. Find something regarding
the DNS settings or the zone file. And we
want to basically add uh DNS records. So,
I can do that here by clicking in this button,
create a new record. And what we want to do is
add an A Record. The target is going to be the
IP address of your virtual machine. So let's go
ahead and copy that and then we'll go back to your
domain name registrar and paste that in. And then
we'll confirm. Okay. So now that IP address is
associated with my domain name. This next one is
optional. We can add another DNS A Record with the
same target, but this time we want it to be from
www.loolanta.org to our IP address. So, let's go
ahead and create that one, too. All right, we got
both of those. So, let's go back into our virtual
machine. And the next thing we want to do is tell
Caddy we have a domain name associated with our
website. So, we can do that with a Caddyfile. So,
um let's use nano, the text editor, to create
a new file called Caddyfile. And then in here,
you want to do something very similar to this.
So, put your domain name here. And then in between
the two curly brackets, what this is saying is
basically the root of our website is going to be
served from the /srv directory which is actually
inside of our docker container. So let's also go
ahead and configure that. But let's save this.
Crl x, capital y, hit enter. And let's make a
public directory here with mkdir public and then
go into that directory and then use nano to make
a index.html file. I'm going to paste in here um
a very simple HTML structure. It has a title for
the website as a Caddy Demo. It has some styling
here, some CSS styling, a big header, one element,
like comment, subscribe, a paragraph, and then a
link. So, let's see what that looks like on the
web browser. So, we'll save that. Crl X, capital
Y, hit enter. And the last thing we want to do is
modify our. Let's go back a directory. We want to
modify our Docker Compose file. So let's open up
uh that file again with nano. And at the bottom
we want to add a section here for volumes. So
basically what this is doing is mapping that srv
directory to the public directory where we just
created the index.html file. And same thing uh
for the the Caddyfile. We want to map that into
the docker container. So um let's go ahead and
save that. And now what we can do is restart our
docker container to reflect those changes. So we
can do docker compose down and then docker compose
up -d like we did in the beginning. And it looks
like everything came up just fine. So let's go
ahead and minimize this. And now instead of going
to our IP address, let's go to our domain name. So
loolanta.org in my case. And we can explicitly
specify https. Hit enter. All right. And there
you have it. We have our website hosted on a cloud
virtual machine, loaded from that index.html file
with our styled header one element, a paragraph
and a link here which actually takes you to my
website where you can find like I said all the uh
configuration files and everything that you need
to copy and paste so you can follow along step by
step. Now, the one big problem with hosting a free
website on Google Cloud, as I alluded to earlier,
is the fact that it only gives you one gigabyte of
outbound data transfer per month. So, let's say
your website is 2 megabytes in size. That's only
like 500 page views that you can have uh per
month before you have to start paying, which
I think it's 12 cents per gigabyte of additional
traffic beyond the free tier. So, um, it's cheap,
but you can see how that could get expensive
pretty quickly if you have a very popular website.
So, you can enable something like a CDN through
Cloudflare that's completely free. You'll probably
10x depending on your cache rate, you're 10x the
amount of pages that you can serve. So, let's say
5,000 pages per month on the free tier. Uh, but
if that is still something that's very limiting
to you, you expect to have more pages, page views
than that, more visitors, um, I recommend that
you check out this video next, which has, um,
there's probably dozens of different ways that
you can host a free website online. So, it'll go
over some of that. And I do keep a up-to-date list
on my website, which I recommend that you check
that out as well. Everything's linked in the
description or on my website. Thank you guys
for watching. I'll see you in the next one.
