Self-Host the Right Way (Docker + Cloudflare Tunnels) - YouTube
Tony Teaches Tech

You can self-host a website at home or in the
cloud, secured with SSL and make it publicly
accessible without opening a single port on your
firewall or router. And I'm going to show you how
step-by-step even if you've never set up a server
before. We'll launch a secure virtual private
server running Ubuntu just $6 a month, but you
could actually do it for free either on your own
hardware or by using my DigitalOcean affiliate
link below to get $200 in server credits,
which earns me a commission and supports
the channel. Then we'll install Docker,
deploy our WordPress containers, and use
Cloudflare Tunnels to provide a free CDN,
firewall, and SSL certificate for our website. So,
let's get started. I'll be using a cloud server to
host WordPress to ensure 24/7 availability of my
website. But if you're self-hosting at home, like
on a Raspberry Pi, for example, you can definitely
still follow along with just a few tweaks. So,
go ahead and grab your free DigitalOcean credits.
Like I said, I'm an affiliate for the company
and I will earn a commission if you use my link.
So, thank you for your support. And then meet me
over in your DigitalOcean dashboard where we will
set up our server. So, what we're going to do is
click on create and then droplets. And now for the
server, as far as the physical data center where
it will reside, pick the region that's closest to
you. I'll pick New York here. And then for the OS,
we want Ubuntu 24.04 LTS, which is long-term
support. And then for the droplet type, we want
uh basic just for this demonstration. If you have
more needs, you can always pick a general purpose
or CPU optimized or one of these other type of
dedicated CPU plans. And then for the CPU options,
again, for this demonstration, I'll pick a regular
$6 a month plan. So, scrolling on down here,
we do want to set up an SSH key. You probably
won't see this if this is your first time using
DigitalOcean. So, what you want to do is click on
new SSH key and follow these instructions here.
And then once you have that, you can select
your SSH key. It's just much stronger than
a password. And the script that we're going to do
next is uh highly dependent on having an SSH key.
And uh to do that script, you want to go to
advanced options. We will enable IPv6 uh which is
a good thing to have for a website nowadays. And
then the initialization script is what we want.
And where it says enter user data here, we want to
go to my website which is also linked below in the
description and copy this cloud-init script right
here. So let's do that. Copy. And then back here,
let's paste that in. And basically what this is
doing is: I have a whole video tutorial series
on my channel about how to set up a VPS, how to
secure it, how to prevent root from logging in,
locking down SSH, firewall, all that good stuff.
This does that. So you can either go ahead and
watch all those videos, which I do encourage you
to do. Uh but to bypass that, to automate it all,
we're just going to use this cloud-init script.
Um the only thing you're going to want to do here
is change my username. Um, I'm going to create
the user Tony. But you want to come through here
and change all of these references to whatever
username you want to have on your server. So, go
ahead and do that. And then the last thing we want
to do here, as far as the host name is concerned,
I'd like to pick something short, something
like WP for WordPress. And then we can go
ahead and create our droplet. All right. So, our
server is up and running at this IP address. So,
let's go ahead and copy that. And now, if you're
on uh Mac or Linux, you want to go ahead and
open a terminal window. And if you're on Windows,
you want to use a command prompt. And what we're
going to do with that is use the SSH program
to log into our server. So SSH, your username,
in my case, Tony, at that IP address, and then
we'll hit enter. And the first time you do this,
it's going to ask about the authenticity of your
host. Uh we do trust that connection. So type yes,
hit enter. And if you do this quick enough like I
just did, you'll see permission denied public key.
That is because that cloud-init script is still
running on your server. It's not finished setting
up yet. So, let's just give it a minute or two
and then we'll come back and try again. All right,
let's try that again. So, we'll do SSH. And
now we are logged into our remote server. So,
the first thing I'm going to do just to make sure
our cloud-init script worked is copy uh from my
website again and paste this command in here to
look at the log for that. And as long as you see
at the very end Your server is configured and
ready", things are probably working. So we can
continue with the tutorial. Now just in case you
are self-hosting at home, we want to make sure
that we remove any type of Docker installation.
We want to get the official uh Docker sh install
script. So let's paste this command in here
to remove all Docker instances. And then with
a fresh clean slate, let's go ahead and use the
curl command to download the get docker.sh script.
And then we'll do a sudo sh get-docker.sh to
install Docker and Docker Compose. Cool. So
that has finished. We have Docker and Docker
Compose installed. The next thing add Tony to
the Docker group. Um so you don't have to type
pseudo every time. Let's execute the usermod
command. And then we'll do a sudo reboot uh just
to make sure that those changes get applied. And
when the server's back up and running, we can go
ahead and log in via SSH yet again. All right,
we're back on our server. So, let's go ahead and
take care of installing WordPress and the database
that goes along with that, which we're going
to be using MariaDB. Uh, to do that, let's make
a directory in here with MKDIR. And then you can
call it whatever you want. I'm going to call mine
uh just tonyswebsite. And then we'll go into
that directory. And before we even make our
Docker Compose file, let's create our environment
file with all of our passwords just to keep those
separate from the configuration file. So, uh,
we'll use the nano text editor to create a file
called .env to store those in. And, uh, again, you
can get this from my website. Paste it in. Um, we
need a database user password, a name, and a root
password for the database. Please change these
values to something that's more secure than what
I have here, but for the sake of demonstration,
um, I'll just keep those. So in order to save
this, what we want to do is type Ctrl X, Capital
Y. Hit Enter. And now that is saved onto our file
system. Next thing we want to do is use the nano
text editor to create our docker-compose.yml
just like this. And then again from my website,
let's go ahead and paste in the configuration
file data which is going to look something like
this. So under the services uh category, we have
WordPress, which we're going to install the latest
version of that. And then for the database,
we want a MariaDB, latest version of that. Um,
a couple other things, we're exposing port 8000.
And all those values that we just created inside
of our environment variable file. Uh, we can see
those here. So, database user, database password,
like I said, just so those aren't in plain text
in our configuration file. And then we have a
couple volumes for WordPress data and database
data, which we do um have mapped here to the
internal container. So that looks good. So we'll
do a Ctrl X, Capital Y, Hit Enter. And as far as
Docker is concerned, that's pretty much all the
configuration that we have to do at this point.
So we can do a docker compose up -d for daemon
mode, which will run this in the background. And
as you can see, it's pulling those images. All
right, that's finished. And just to make sure
everything is up and running, I always like to do
a docker compose ps to see the list of processes.
And as long as we see uh WordPress and WordPress
database, both of those are up and running, we
should be good to go. So, let's minimize this real
quick. And again, grab your IP address. If you're
running locally at home, if you're self-hosting
at home, you're going to want to use localhost
instead of your IP address. But what we can do is
basically go to your IP address or localhost:8000.
And we should see the WordPress installation
page show up, which is great. At this point,
do not proceed with installing WordPress
because it'll install under the IP address.
Let's go ahead and set up a Cloudflare tunnel
first. So, let's actually get out of this and
go over to your Cloudflare dashboard. If you
don't have a Cloudflare account, it is free.
And the reason we're using a Cloudflare is
pretty much the crux of this tutorial, which is
um it's not only giving us an SSL certificate, a
CDN, and all that good bot protection, but also
it's allowing us to publicly host this website
from literally any device, a cloud server at home,
Raspberry Pi, like I said, uh without exposing
your public IP address. And the way we can do
that is with a Cloudflare tunnel. So, step one, go
ahead and get a domain name into Cloudflare. Super
straightforward process. Uh, I'll probably have
a video up about that soon, but it's like I said,
straightforward. Get your domain name in here on
your dashboard homepage. We're going to be using
tonytravels.com. So, once you do that, then
we can go ahead and go over here to the left
hand side where it says zero trust. And then
we'll click on networks. And then over here,
click on manage tunnels. What we're interested
in creating is a Cloudflared tunnel. So,
let's click on add a tunnel and you can name
it whatever you want. I'm going to do WordPress
VPS. Save that tunnel. And then because Ubuntu is
based on Debian, we're going to click on Debian
here. And then, like it says, we want to install
Cloudflared on our system. So, let's go ahead and
copy that and go back into our terminal window and
we can paste that in. Hit enter. Let that do its
thing. All right, that's finished. And then, like
it says down here, let's minimize this. After you
install Cloudflare, we can install a service to
automatically run the tunnel. So that's perfect.
Let's go ahead and copy that and paste it in. All
right. And yeah, you might have missed it, but
down here below the connector does now say that we
are connected. So what we can do now is click on
next. And under the published applications tab,
pick the domain name that you want to associate
this with. Like I said, I'm going to be doing
Tony Travels. There won't be a path for this,
but for the service, we're going to do HTTP. But
regardless of if you're self-hosting at home or
if you're on a cloud VPS somewhere, for the URL,
we want to do localhost:8000. And then finally,
click on complete setup. All right. So, you
can see I have a couple other tunnels here.
More content on Cloudflare tunnels from me in
the future. But let's go back in here. What I
want to show you is exactly what's going to
happen. So basically anytime somebody comes
to tonytravels.com on the public internet, the
Cloudflared daemon that we just installed is
going to connect back to our server via localhost
port 8000. We don't even have to make that HTTPS
because it's going to be handled on Cloudflare
side. We don't have to expose any ports. And
basically what's going to happen is that website
is going to load under this domain name. So we can
actually try that right now. Let's open up a new
tab and go to tonytravels.com. Hit enter and we
get that same exact WordPress installation page.
So, let's go ahead quickly go through this and
then we'll install WordPress. All right, WordPress
is installed. Let's go ahead and log in with those
credentials. Hit login and there we go. This is
our WordPress admin dashboard. We can see the
public facing website here. I'm not going to go
through WordPress setup in this tutorial. There's
a lot of tutorials about that, including on my
channel, so check those out. Uh, but one thing
I do want to check in here is going to tools and
then site health. Click on the info tab and then
under WordPress we can see that we are running
version 6.9. And then as so as far as the server
is concerned we have PHP version 8.3.28. Now let's
say that that version of PHP didn't work for us or
if we wanted a different web server. We can go
to a repository like hub.docker.com and find a
version that works for us. So let's say that we
wanted PHP version 8.4 with WordPress version
6.9. Instead of using latest in our Docker Compose
file, we can just copy this string and update PHP,
which is so much easier than updating system
packages. So let's actually do that right now.
Uh let's open our terminal window back up.
Nano docker compose. And instead of latest,
we'll do 6.9-PHP 8.4. Ctrl X. Capital Y. Hit
Enter. And then we'll do a docker compose up
-d to pull that package. All right, that looks
good. Let's minimize that. Go back to our site
health page. Before we're using PHP version
8.3.28. Let's refresh the page. Now we'll go
to server. Now we got PHP version 8.4. So like I
said, much easier. There is one last thing that
we want to do. The cloud-init script in the
beginning did open up port 8000 so we could
see that across the internet. We don't need that
open anymore. Let's leave SSH open. Let's close
down port 8000 with this command right here: sudo
ufw delete allow 8000/tcp. Hit Enter. And then to
confirm that worked, we'll do a ufw status again.
And now we only have port 22 accessible. Let's
do one last check to make sure our website still
loads even though no ports are open. And it does
just fine. There's so much more you can do with
Cloudflare tunnels and Docker. And believe me,
I have a bunch of videos planned for both of those
topics and more. So definitely subscribe to this
channel. YouTube thinks you're going to like this
video. Watch that next. I'll see you over there.
