5 Things Every Great D&D Faction Needs
https://youtu.be/oAwOr3e8GyI

What makes factions the ultimate D and D
tool? Because without them, you're a D
and D game. Kind of boring. Players stop
caring. The world feels empty. It's kind
of like running a theme park with no
rides, which is like technically
probably still better than what I used
to do with Roller Coaster Tycoon. But
look at my table. If my players aren't
constantly arguing about who they should
trust or whether or not it might be
worth it to kind of throw the tavern
barkeep to the wolves, then I know I'm
kind of off my game because factions are
one of the best ways to keep the tension
in your games alive. And here's the
truth. A lot of DMs tend to use factions
completely wrong, and that's how their
world ends up feeling a little bit flat.
But today, we're going to break down
those big mistakes that some DMs tend to
make. And then I'll show you five ways
to turn factions into little baby drama
machines. That way, every single one of
your sessions feels like an episode of
Game of Thrones, but you know, from like
one of the good seasons. So, the very
first thing a lot of DMs get wrong is
that they add factions in after they've
already finished world building. Kind of
like the way some people treat flavor in
their cooking. You know, like a thieves
guild is just a little bit of dried
stale parsley that they've decided to
sprinkle on top. Optional, an
afterthought. Factions, though, they
shape the entire flavor of your world.
Much more so than having a town off to
the side of the map that no one will
ever reach. So after I figure out what I
want my campaign's high concept to be,
so for example, a FA Wild version of
Under the Dome, one of the very next
things I do is I start thinking about
who is influencing life here and how are
they influencing it, for better or for
worse. Because here's the thing. The
second you know who's driving change in
your world, you also know who's likely
to react when Cindy's going around being
a murder hobo again. It's the difference
between a static setting and one that
pushes back. So that's a great place to
invest your world building efforts into.
Another big mistake, factions that are
too passive or too generic and by proxy
completely forgettable. It's easy to
just lay something out like here's the
good guys that the players should side
with and here's the big evil empire that
they're supposed to fight. And if it
isn't your first campaign, that's a
complete snoozefest. Players crave
nuance. They want to make hard choices.
They want moral gray areas. They want to
decide who the real baddies are
themselves. So, going back to my Fayw
Wild campaign, I'd want a second to
think beyond that black and white world
view. What kind of factions appear in
situations where people are trapped
together in a small town like this? And
how would that be altered by this fay
inspired setting? One faction might be
trying to seize control of the town by
force. Another faction might be focused
on gathering knowledge about the fay,
and they might want more careful,
deliberate decisions. And a religious
faction might even be a wild card. They
might be secretly letting the fay into
the dome. Maybe they think they're
saviors instead of dangers. Notice how
though none of them are just sitting on
the sidelines. They're all actively
pushing towards something, which means
that conflict is inevitable. These are
the types of factions that create tons
of different types of plot hooks for
your games. More on that in a bit,
though. Because before we go over the
five things that make a faction truly
memorable. The last thing I see a lot of
DMs get wrong is kind of subtle, but
I've seen it sour more than a few
campaigns, and that's letting your
feelings get hurt by your players
ignoring your factions. Maybe you've
built up this entire royal political
court intrigue, but your players have
all just decided to get on a ship to
become pirates. This can happen for so
many different reasons, and I really
recommend watching my campaign building
101 series if you haven't already. It'll
definitely help make sure you don't end
up with a weird situation where the
players are showing up for a completely
different game than the one you happen
to be running. But if your players seem
to reject something like this, something
that you set up, I've got a great secret
for you. Factions aren't tied to themes,
they're tied to conflicts. Nothing is
stopping you from repackaging your work
with some hook hands and shoulder
parrots. That way, they appeal more to
your players and the things that they're
excited about in your world. Don't fall
into the trap of thinking that you can
only use these factions one way because
these factions are ultimately just
templates for plot hooks and conflicts.
So, if you stay flexible, your players
will always find their way back towards
the fun. So, if these are the mistakes
that make factions boring, what can we
do to make sure that our players are
enchanted by our beguilingly crafted
factions instead? Start by giving your
factions purpose.
What do I mean by this? Factions aren't
just big old groups of NPCs. They should
exist for a reason. They're there to
push on the world in ways that your
players can't simply control or ignore.
So ask yourself, why does this faction
exist? Are they enforcing order,
protecting their trade, trying to
convert lost souls? Because if they
don't have a clear reason to exist,
they're ultimately just set dressing. I
tend to think of factions as occupying
three sorts of general spheres. We have
government, business, and civilians, and
then religion. So when you're creating a
faction, think about what sorts of
conflicts might be introduced between
these different factions. What happens
when these spheres collide? Like imagine
a government faction trying to lay down
strict laws and a merchants guild trying
to bend these laws for profit. Who wins?
Who loses? That's where you'll have a
chance to wrap your players up into the
drama. Because remember, factions aren't
just waiting around, waiting for your
players to notice them. They should
already be moving, acting, stirring
things up in the background, whether
your players choose to engage or not.
So, don't throw in a Thieves Guild
faction just because you think every
fantasy world needs one. If you do end
up needing one, you can always add one
in on the fly and flush it out later,
but only create factions that are
actually doing something. Because
factions that actively participate in
and affect your worlds, they give your
campaigns a beating heart. But of
course, a purpose isn't enough on its
own. The next question is, what exactly
do these factions want? Which is why you
need to give your factions specificity?
Factions with vague goals are like
players who say, "I attack with
literally no description." Technically
fine, but boring. God, so boring.
Something like gaining power. Not a good
goal. Something like overthrow the king
and put Frederick on the throne instead.
Better. Murder the king during the
celebration of the return of the
moonbearers. Imprison his son and put
Frederick on the throne in his place to
serve as a puppet to the brains and the
faction leader behind this operation.
Lander best. Here's the secret. The more
specific the goal, the more ways that
your players can collide with it. Do
they try to foil the assassination? Do
they plot with another faction to free
the son that's been imprisoned? Do they
end up siding with Alexander? Because,
let's be honest, the king does kind of
suck. You don't need to have everything
mapped and planned out. But an easy gut
check when it comes to trying to figure
out if you're being specific enough is
to ask yourself what happens if the
players never show up. If you feel a
little lost on the details when you do
this, your factions probably need more
specific goals. Don't settle for vague
fuzzy goals. Give your factions
something big and concrete. That way,
the world isn't waiting around for the
party to come along and act. Give your
players something that's moving around
them instead and creating more
interesting ways for them to get
involved than stopping Lander from
gaining power ever could. And if you're
looking for some great specific factions
you can drop right into your games, let
me save you some time. Today's sponsor
is Scorch Basin by Homie and the Dude. A
Mad Max meets Dune inspired TTRPG
setting that is absolutely packed with
five unique factions, each with their
own values, goals, and agendas and a
massive mysterious crystal monolith in
the middle of a meteor crater. It's
basically a faction playground. There
are over a hundred creators that got
together to collaborate in various ways
on this project. I actually got to voice
one of the Scar Warrior NPCs, but Scorch
Basin is not only jam-packed with cool
lore. They've got a one-of-a-kind spell
system called the current rules for
vehicular madness for those who wish to
be shiny and chrome. Tons of cool
monsters inspired by your favorite
desert fiction, a custom soundtrack for
your sessions, and they even have
recipes designed by a world-class chef.
Like, as a maximalist, I am so into
this. Who does that? But the best part,
it's completely system agnostic. So
whether you're playing 5e 2024, Shadow
Dark, Dagger Heart, Morborg, or Franken
games like a little old me, you can run
either a full scorched basin campaign or
just rip out pieces of lore and drop
them straight into your already existing
world. So if you're like me and love
postapocalyptic mayhem and fantasy
desert aesthetics, support me and this
awesome team by checking out Scorch
Basin on Kickstarter using my link
below. Now, even if your factions have
purpose and specific goals, there's
still one trap that can make them feel a
little flat. And that's when every
member of the faction acts like a clone.
And that's where variance comes in. The
beauty of factions is that you don't
need to flush out a bunch of NPCs. You
can improvise majority of them on the
fly. But for your major factions, I like
to build out a small handful of NPCs
with different takes on the same big
goal. That way, the factions have some
depth. I always flush out a faction
leader of some sort, someone who really
embraces the faction's main goal, but
then I like to add in one or two NPCs
that are more of dissenters or rivals
within this group. They should still
share the same overall goal, but instead
they'll have very different ideas about
how they might achieve said goal. For
example, everyone in this faction might
agree that yeah, the king has to go.
Time to overthrow him. But NPCA A might
think that Lysander is an and
that he himself should be the next king.
NPC B has no horse in that game, but is
dead set on the idea that they should
scrap imprisoning the sun and wipe out
the entire royal line before anyone can
hit them back. Suddenly, your faction is
no longer a weird hive mind monolith,
but its own entity full of political
drama waiting to pop off. And the reason
I like to create these many differences
is because it gives the players options.
Maybe they agree that Lysander is in
fact a huge jerk. They would never
support his cause. But MPCA is prone to
flattery, so they might be willing to
see how his bid for the throne works
out. Maybe they think they can influence
him. So, choose a couple NPCs, jot down
a quick sentence or two about why they
have this big goal, what their other
separate goals might be, and things like
their rank, ability, resources, that
sort of thing. This way, if you need to
create someone in a faction on the fly,
you still have your faction blueprint,
but you've also fleshed out a handful of
specific people in depth to give this
faction a ton more life. And this is
actually where most factions fall apart.
At this point, they look great on paper,
but in play, nothing happens. So, let's
fix that. Your factions need importance.
This is about impact and consequences. I
touched on this a little bit with
specificity and purpose, but it deserves
its own point because I really want to
hammer this idea home. When your players
interact with a faction, it should
matter. Their choices should create
ripples. Good ones, bad ones, even
straight up weird ones. So ask yourself,
why would this faction care about the
party? Why would the PCs want to engage
with them? What are the actual stakes at
risk here? Do the players or the faction
need resources, information, assistance,
or is the faction reacting to something
the players already stirred up? Again,
we don't want to just shoehorn these in
just to have factions. Think about what
would put them in the PC's path. And a
great example of this is in Curse of
Strod. When the players first walk into
the town of Locki, one of the first
things they notice in the town square is
that there are people in the stocks
wearing donkey masks. It's striking.
It's unsettling. But most importantly,
it's hard to ignore. Suddenly, the
players know that this town has rules,
punishments, power struggles, and
depending on how they respond to
everything, the story changes. So,
that's a great example of a faction
being put in the player's path that's
both lore rich and actionable, and it
can have long lasting consequences or
impact depending on what the players do.
Because each faction cares about their
own specific things, just like the
players, they're moving within and
altering the world, but they're also
reacting to the presence of your
players. Factions can push back. And
remember, players can't be friends with
everyone. If they cozy up to one group,
they're probably burning a bridge with
another, whether they intend to or not.
All of these consequences, though,
that's where our drama in these games
lives. So, once your factions have
purpose, specificity, variety, and
importance, how do we make absolutely
sure that your players engage with them?
Simple. Give the players a faction of
their own. If you watch my campaign
building 101 series, you'll know this is
very much my pattern. Screw the tired
you all meet in a tavern trope. I start
every session zero with the group
already being part of something. That
way they've got buyin from their very
first dice roll. So for my Fay Wild
campaign, the group started as members
of the Bramble Brigade, a scrappy town
watch type of crew, and they were pitted
against the forceful nature of the
Baron's town guard. And then for my
Underdark campaign, the group is united
under the patronage of Boris, an
eccentric retired explorer chasing after
rumors of a magic crystal. But of
course, so are his rivals. The point is,
when the players start inside a faction
of their own, they already have stakes,
potential enemies, potential allies. It
makes it easy for group dynamics to
quickly and naturally emerge. And then
suddenly the world around them feels
just so very alive. And like low key,
everything is a faction. You don't have
to be super official with this. If all
your PCs share a house and they all hate
their obnoxious and noisy neighbors,
congrats. They're part of a faction.
Yay. If you enjoyed this breakdown,
don't forget to like and subscribe. And
now, if you're on mobile, don't forget
to hype. That way, YouTube knows you
actually like like my video. Yes, that's
what we're doing now. And if you want
even more DM tools to supercharge your
campaigns, make sure to check out these
bad boys next.
