Building and Consuming Urban Digital Twins with Open-Source Tools — GeoSolutions
Source: https://youtu.be/owQW-AUjk0U

[0:03] Good morning everybody, or good afternoon, good evening wherever you are on the globe. Welcome to the GeoSolutions webinar on building and consuming urban digital twins using open-source tools. Today the presentation will be guided by Tobia Di Pisa, Stefano Bovio, and Georgios also on the line with us today. So we'll do a brief introduction, introduce you to who GeoSolutions is, and then get started with the 3D urban digital twin presentation.

[0:41] There's been a lot of momentum around urban digital twins, especially in city planning, transportation, emergency management and response, etc. So there's a lot of excitement here, and we've been a Cesium 3D developer now for about a year as an organization. I want to emphasize we're always here to help you better understand or answer questions related to 3D Tiles and any Cesium 3D work you might be doing. My name is Ryan Burley, I am in the US, and we have offices in Italy and the US.

[1:15] We've been focused on open-source development for 17-18 years now. For those of you not familiar with GeoSolutions, GeoSolutions employs a majority of the core code developers and core code committers for GeoServer, GeoNode, MapStore, GeoNetwork and all of the associated plugins around GeoServer, and some of the underlying tool sets such as GeoTools, the OGC protocols, etc.

[1:49] We're always frequently asked how do we make money, what's our business model. We provide professional training services, we do a lot of guaranteed or subscription services where we can host GeoServer for example for your organization, we offer commercial support. If you ever need somebody as a reach-back or a direct pipeline to the core code developers, we're always here to support you, and we do a lot of custom development as well. That being said, if you ever have any basic questions or you just have some questions about getting GeoServer or MapStore or anything open-source related, we're always here to help you out, never hesitate to reach out.

[2:32] We have customers all over the globe as you can see from this map, with a focus on several different industries. We're very industry agnostic, we work in all levels of government, military, commercial verticals such as telecom, research, Earth observation obviously. Our key focus, our niche, our specialty is getting massive amounts of data from sensors to end-user applications. So there's the web GIS performance between server and client applications, and then all the data engineering around just getting data transmitted from sensors all the way through the plumbing out to whatever end-user application you're using, leveraging open-source software.

[3:25] We are members of OSGeo, OGC, the United States Geospatial Intelligence Foundation, and as I mentioned we are certified Cesium developers as an organization. So we do have a very high level of expertise in Cesium 3D tile generation and how to implement that within your organization leveraging open source.

[3:47] I do want to emphasize resources. There are plenty of videos, we have a blog on our website to keep abreast of what's going on in open source and in the industry in general. This recording will be posted on our YouTube channel, which also has all of our past webinar recordings — everything from GeoServer integration to GeoNode latest release updates to MapStore. There's a full stack of videos available for you. If you're ever looking for anything specific let us know, and if you ever have any questions we're always interested in hearing how open-source tools are being used out in the wild. Feel free to reach out to me directly or info@geosolutionsgroup.com. And with that I will pass it off to Tobia and Stefano and we'll get started on building urban digital twins using open-source tools. Take it away guys.

[4:55] Thank you so much Ryan. Can you share the screen, Stefano please? Okay, so first of all I would like to present myself. My name is Tobia, I'm product owner of MapStore WebGIS at GeoSolutions. In this webinar we will guide you in the process of transforming, as Ryan said, the vector data and point cloud data sets into 3D Tiles format by using our product, the Digital Twin Toolbox.

[5:41] So, consuming 3D data in a WebGIS application, in WebGIS applications, has increasingly become a requirement over the last year for many environments and fields — ranges of use for example such as digital twins and urban planning, flight operations and aerospace in general, IoT real-time, underground, and so on. The urban environment is one of the main contexts in which many organizations, but also public administrations and municipalities, actually have concrete needs to provide even more advanced 3D digital representations.

[6:45] This subject usually has also to combine existing 2D data within a 3D environment with a proper and reliable representation of terrain, buildings, urban features, etc. So in the overall picture, the 3D Tiles become one of the main formats for streaming and rendering 3D geospatial contents on the web. As you can see from the slide, for lidar, derived meshes, oblique imagery, 3D buildings, point clouds and more.

[7:44] Considering effectively the ever-growing and even more specific needs in that context, it is usually necessary to first of all identify the best tools for viewing 3D data in that format, and then of course identify tools to convert existing data sets into 3D Tiles format in a proper and performing way. But of course the question is: what about doing that using open-source tools? That's effectively what was the challenge for us.

[8:33] The answer to the first question is quite immediate — you can use MapStore, which is a performing WebGIS for visualizing, styling, measuring, browsing 3D data in such format, with many functionalities, many functions available out of the box.

[9:00] For the second point, of course, there is the Digital Twin Toolbox. The aim of the Digital Twin Toolbox is to effectively support the conversion process to 3D Tiles format by using a well-driven set of open-source tools. Effectively, the tools that need to convert data in 3D Tiles format are not always the same, as this usually depends on how source data had been collected for example, and the process to follow is not always the same and frequently it is not, and it depends also on the format.

[9:53] For this reason it is quite important to have the necessary instruments to be able to catch all these shades of gray in the process of converting to 3D Tiles. So: have necessary tools for visualizing, inspecting and assessing input data sets; have the ability to manage and manipulate data sets to reach the desired results — think of the classification, decimation and so on — but be also able to manage reliable instruments to tune tiling options, coordinate reference system and all the other georeferential adjustments.

[10:44] The main objectives are: collect the best open-source tools for the purpose of processing common data sources in the urban environment — that's the goal for us. Now shapefile and LAS files for now are supported. Provide workflows to orchestrate a set of processing chains and methodologies to evaluate, prepare, convert, preview and so on, and all of this having available a user-friendly UI to facilitate the work. So giving this overview, I think that we can now go more in depth with Stefano to learn how to use the Digital Twin Toolbox with some examples of use. Thank you so much.

[11:44] Thanks Tobia. I'm presenting myself, I'm Stefano Bovio and I work at GeoSolutions on projects like MapStore core and the GeoNode front-end part as a front-end developer, and I helped with the team to work on the Digital Twin Toolbox, this set of tools that will allow us to see today how to convert data into 3D Tiles for aiming at a digital twin visualization.

[12:21] This is the final result that we want to get at the end — creating this sample, a sub-sample of the city of Washington D.C. We downloaded the data and prepared some sample data that you can replicate at the end of the webinar following also the recording. So the idea is, based on open data, to convert that into 3D Tile data. Having this step from an open portal, obtain this data that we already prepared with a link that you can download. I will show how to process this data with the Digital Twin Toolbox, and finally I will present the visualization inside MapStore WebGIS.

[13:21] The structure of the data that we will see and convert is focusing on three different main types of data. From the actual extension, shapefile or not, we selected some we think are meaningful to the representation of the digital twin: the buildings volume, that usually can be constructed from a shapefile — so you have the building footprint, you want an extrusion, and then using this extrusion in your application. Here we will demonstrate how you can get an instanced model for each tree that you have in your data set. And finally the wider urban environment represented as a point cloud, and how we can manage to process this data.

[14:21] To have already introduced the Digital Twin Toolbox, I want just to highlight a few things. First of all it's a tool that is an ongoing work — this is not production ready, but it allows you to create on your own, for example using Docker, the 3D Tiles, and I will show this later how this works. The reason also for 3D Tiles that we're using — 3D Tiles are an open standard, an OGC open standard, so this is another reason we selected this format. And it's able also to stream massive 3D geospatial content. So these two parts are important for us to work with this kind of format. And finally, the final visualization: we are using an embedded MapStore viewer, it's an open WebGIS framework where we can visualize our output.

[15:31] The Digital Twin Toolbox setup. The Digital Twin Toolbox you can find on GitHub — it is hosted on GitHub in the repo under our GeoSolutions-IT organization, you can find the repo there. Before you start you need some tools on your machine. First of all you need Docker, so Docker or OrbStack for the development. You can install both on Linux, Windows or Mac, there are different ways to install it, here there is the link to the quick start. And also Git — here we are not using it for the version control itself but to clone the repo on our workspace on the computer.

[16:22] Here are the setup steps. Once you have this installed on your computer, you need to clone the repo in your workspace. So navigate into the workspace and run this command from a terminal, and this will create a new folder called digital-twin-toolbox. Then go inside the digital-twin-toolbox, copy the sample and create a new file called .env. Once everything has been done, you need to start and use the docker compose command from the same command line — so you are inside the digital twin toolbox and use docker compose up.

[16:58] The first time that you will use docker compose up, this will also build one of the applications inside — the web app in particular — so it will take around 20 minutes. But the next time you use it, it's already created the image for Docker so it will be faster, the initialization. I will show after that — my machine here, I already prepared that so we can go right away in the application. But these are the steps: clone, navigate on the folder, copy and create a new .env file without changing everything. What you have inside the .env sample is already the default setup, and then start docker compose up.

[17:42] Once you start the application, it's this 3D space where you can navigate and a control panel at the top here. So you can reach this at localhost:3000 — this is the default port — and this is running all localhost, and right now it's the only way to start it.

[18:10] The user interface. There are three parts in the user interface. The first is the controls that are on the left here — with the controls they change based on the input data. This input data can be shapefile, can be LAS file at the moment, and you can switch with a select, and the structure of this UI will change based on the input data providing different actions and variables to apply to the processes. The central part in the background is composed by a 3D viewer, it's used mainly to preview data that you want to process to create a 3D digital twin — so it's mainly a debug interface to have feedback on the current structure or the geometry that then will become 3D Tiles. Finally we have on the left a process feedback, it's logging all the background processes, all the interaction that we are doing with the actions in the UI. It's mainly in this initial phase of this work really helpful to understand what's going on in the process if something's not working, and may have also additional debug view.

[19:49] Now that we've seen the user interface, I will move away from the slides and I'll start to do a live demo of this work. Before I do that, I just want to introduce the main workflow that we will see. This diagram has two main directories: we're starting always from a data directory, always going to a tileset directory in our workflow, and sometimes coming back to the data directory to create a new input data from the data that we have already.

[20:24] There are three main processes: the conversion of shapefiles, the processing of point cloud data (so some adjustment of the point cloud — sometimes as-is is not enough for processing the point cloud, I will explain later the reason, so we need to process data, I create a new LAS file as input data), and then the conversion of point cloud to tiles. These three highlighted processes are the ones that we will show today. We included also in this presentation the experimental conversion of lidar data to 3D mesh, but this is experimental because it's still ongoing work — we want to improve this part in our workflow. So this is the current solution that you find when you start the Digital Twin Toolbox application.

[21:30] Before I start, I'm going to do these steps and show you how to do it. We have the sample data that can be downloaded from here — it's a zip folder that contains several data, and we need before we start everything to place this in the static folder, and I'm going to do that. So moving from here — now here, as you can see, we have a digital-twin-toolbox directory, and you have something like this if you clone the repo. So you run a git clone GitHub GeoSolutions-IT, this is the toolbox, you get a folder like this. And if you downloaded the sample data you have a zip folder like this one.

[22:22] Just to show also another part of the setup, here in the file we have the .env and the .env sample file. Just copy this file and rename it, so these two parts are important. Now we need to set up the data. First of all, to ensure that the application is initialized correctly, we need to unzip the content of this folder.

[22:56] Now that we have the content, you will find inside a LAS file, an ortho photo — a TIFF file that has the same extension of the LAS file, so it's the same tile as the LAS file, and we'll use this for the colorization. Then we have a building footprint (buildings_3D, EPSG:26985) — that is the building footprints that we will use to recreate the volumes. And finally the trees as urban furniture. These are the files that we're using to construct the representation that we saw initially in the slides.

[23:39] I'm going to, first of all, copy this and paste this here. Going into the digital-twin-toolbox, the important folder that we need to pay attention to is the static one — that contains the data (input data), and by default it's empty. So you need to copy this file here and move there. Every time you need a new input file — to add a new shapefile or a new LAS file — you can drag and drop here. It's important that the shapefile should be inside a zip folder, and a LAS file does not need a zip folder.

[24:34] Once this is done — I missed that, the application needs to be initialized — you can also add the new data when the application is already initialized and then refresh the web page. So this phase is not important, I want just to start the application with something inside. Then I will open a terminal, I'm using the WSL Linux subsystem because I have Docker installed there, and I can use the docker compose up command. Every time you want to start the application you can run docker compose up. This will start — there are right now three containers: one for the PostGIS that is used from some processes, one for nginx for managing the endpoint, and the Digital Twin Toolbox that is the actual application that collects all the open-source libraries that we found to generate these processes and conversions.

[25:49] You will see, if you're using docker compose up, some feedback, and at the end you will see "listening on" which means that internally it has started. So we can go in our web browser, open and go to the HTTP localhost — not this one — 3000, and you should see something like this if everything is working. You have the 3D ground where you can use the left mouse, click and drag to pan, and the right button of the mouse to rotate — so click, drag, keep the mouse down on the right, and then you can rotate. And use the mouse wheel to zoom in and zoom out. So these are the interactions with the main view.

[26:49] Now it's empty because we did not select anything. We can start by the UI by selecting the first input, the data that we want to convert, that is the building footprints. So here we select the building footprints. In the selection you can choose the data that we included in the static data folder — it's there, so it's available. We have the name of the file plus the extension. Once we selected, for a certain type like the shapefile, right away it's creating the 3D view. As you can see this file is composed by footprints of the buildings, but you can see that they're not flat — some have, so the vertices of this shapefile have a Z coordinate, so they are located also in the third dimension in the space, not just flat, aligned with the actual terrain.

[27:59] Now that we have this data inside, the first thing that we may want to do to create a volume is to extrude this volume. To do that we have a section in the control panel called geometry options. Here we have a few options like lower limits, upper limits, height in meters. So we can decide for example, using a constant value, to extrude everything to the same elevation. So here we can put everything to zero and then here everything to 100, and as you can see all the features are starting from zero with the lower limit and then the upper limit is 100. This is just to show you that you can change this variable to have a preview. Here on the left we have the logging of what's happening, telling us that the geometry is being generated.

[29:14] The result is not the one that we want because not all these buildings have the same height. So one thing that we can do with this UI is to use expressions using properties for each feature. If you inspect this input data, it contains for each feature information related to the minimum Z, maximum Z. So we can use this information to create the solution for each feature. For example we can say the lower limit uses the min Z value, and the maximum is the max Z value — these are properties of each of these features. So if we apply, we get the extrusion with the correct height for each element.

[30:19] This could work, but we could improve it better with the options that we have with the Digital Twin Toolbox. For example, we may have some differences in the Z value. In this case the Z value here is evaluated above the sea level, but the geometry itself is a 3D geometry. So we can use more advanced expressions like using a computation of the dollar-mean-Z. This dollar-mean-Z is taking the average — sorry, the minimum Z value of each feature. And we can use this to extrude by using an expression more complex than the one that we had before, taking the differences between the max Z value minus the minimum Z value. In this case we are computing the height of the volume and we are starting this from the minimum Z value computed on the feature, and without putting anything into the lower limit, the tool itself is computing and keeping the lower limit by the default geometry, and applying the upper limit from the formula that we use here.

[31:45] Now this is just to showcase that you have several options based on the data that you have, that you can use to create your volume. The workflow behind is also able to detect if the lower limit is higher than the upper limit and swap it. Then once we are good to go with our geometry — so this is the volume that we want to represent our digital twin — we can pass to the next section, that is the tiling process.

[32:28] Here we have a few options, you can use the default one. I want just to highlight that you can decide how many features should be per tile — here by default we have 100. And you can adjust the geometric error. The geometric error is used in 3D to decide at which distance the camera the application should display the content. So if you increase this to like 500, it means that we can see this far away. So this value could be adjusted also after some tests in the final sample to see if it's working well for our purposes. By default we are keeping this 250 m — about this could change.

[33:20] Once we are good to go, we can click on create tileset, and this will initialize a process. This process uses PostGIS where we store the geometry, and it's using also the library called pg2b3dm — it's an open-source library that, starting from a polygon stored in PostGIS, it's able to convert to 3D Tiles. As you can see here we have the feedback from the backend side as it generated tiles, and we have a button here that allows us to have a preview of our tileset. If we click this, it opens a new window where we have our 3D tile. And as you can see here, the geometry follows the same structure that we have here.

[34:16] We can test also using the scroll — as you can see now it disappears because it's outside of that range of the camera, so it's hiding the value there. There's a sort of computation of the pixel value of the error of the geometry on the fly based on the camera position. Then we have also the possibility to have some options like the debugging of volume — here it's creating some bounding boxes to highlight the tiles, so where the tile has been cut. This means that with these two steps we created a 3D Tiles for the building volumes — that is the first step.

[34:49] We can then move to the next input data. We are always working with a shapefile in this case, but in this case they are points — our points. So the workflow is slightly different, because for each point we should decide what kind of model we want to apply. In this case we have trees, so at the end I want to have something that resembles trees. Each of these models is a glTF model, glb in format, and inside the application you can find a static folder, a glb folder here. So the model default is a cube, then you have a cone by default, and so on. These are the ones available, but you can add additional models if you want. So you can create a model for example with Blender and then add this to the folder.

[36:14] Then we can decide — we have the preview, we see the location, and here we may want to change the model. We have some fields in the geometry options: in this case there's no upper limits and lower limit anymore, we have model rotation, scale and translation. Now for this use case, for this webinar, we want trees, so we want to use the tree model. So we just add, using the double quote, the string "tree.glb" that corresponds to the model that we have in the folder — tree.glb. If you apply this now, it's important that the model, and we will see trees in this case.

[37:07] All these support expressions, so for example we know that there is the height value for each tree, and we may want to scale this using the height value — it's inside of each feature, we have this information, we can apply. Oh, probably it's too much, because the model is 10 times big — is not the value. Now this is not the correct value because the height is in feet, so we need to multiply by 0.348... and then apply. So here we can see that we can also modify the shape, the scale of the model for each feature. Remember that when you decide this, it will be persistent in the final view — you cannot change it on the file, in the final application. So it's something that is then stored inside the 3D tile itself.

[38:09] For the moment we can decide to keep just a marker for each of these elements. We can also work on the rotation, so if we have a property that represents the rotation we use this — for example for a point of view you use the cone, the cone based on the direction that you want to represent, the view that we want to highlight. So once we have decided that the model is the model that we want, we pass to the next section, the tiling options. Here we can decide the type and features and, as we had before, the maximum geometric error, which range we should stop to see the tileset. We can use the default one and create the tileset.

[39:07] Here it's using another library — you can always see the name of the library behind. I don't want to say it wrong, so it's py3dtiles export... this is the pipeline of this process. And here at the end we will get the same workflow as we had before with the tileset preview. We can click on this and we have the preview as before. In this case we have trees, the model. The original model contains also colors, and you can see no color here because this is a debugging view — this one is meant to show if the faces are visible with these colors. But at the end in the final preview here in the window, we can see the model. In this case we can see also and detect the tiles generated. Now the white color is not so visible, but when you're working on this you can see the division of the tiling inside. This is the workflow that represents the point instances.

[41:00] So if you have a point shapefile, the one that we saw before was the polygon shapefile, and this was — we close the processing of polygon and point in shapefiles.

[41:23] Now we can go to the point cloud. So when we select the LAS file, we can see that there is no preview. The reason is because we need to generate this preview, and we can do that with the section with visualization options. Here we can click on create data sample. At the first time it will take a while, some few seconds; the next time it stores this information so it's faster. And here we have the sample of the point cloud — we're using this for the marking purposes and to see if the point cloud is colorized, if there is RGB information.

[42:24] One thing to know about point cloud also is that in some cases we will need to adjust the vertical datum. This is because in some cases like this one the elevation is computed above the sea level, but Cesium — that is the engine that we're using in MapStore — is expecting the elevation above the ellipsoid. So we need to convert this point cloud and process this point cloud to generate another one that has two things: a correct shift of the elevation, and the second one is to have the colorized images. So we will use the "process data" here to generate this new point cloud that is adjusted on the vertical datum and has colorization.

[43:26] First of all we get also information about the projection that we can get from metadata that will be helpful later. When you click on projection, you get on the left the output. And here we need first of all to give a new name — process — so we create a new file called 196_processed. Then we have to convert this. To do this we need... and I'm going to show you the slide. Here we need, for the vertical datum, a geoid information that we can download — there is a link on the PROJ repo, and we can download and then place this inside the digital-twin-toolbox in v_datum, like g2018 (gtx) here.

[44:34] So after you did that, you can — for this specific case, we know that the EPSG is 26985. We are using this geoid as a starting point, from this projection to the ellipsoid of 26985. So we need to copy this, and from CRS you can use PROJJSON here, and here "to CRS". And finally here on the raster image, we can use the image that is inside — the TIFF image that is inside the data — that's the ortho photo for the colorization.

[45:39] This processing will start a PDAL pipeline, so we can start this. In the meanwhile that we wait for the result: so here we have, from the data we are getting the LAS file, the TIFF image for the ortho photo, using PDAL both create a new point cloud that will then be placed inside the static data folder. Waiting for the process to complete. Here you can also open the Docker behind, see the logging of the actual command running, and the pipeline that is running in the background. Let's see how it takes to compute this.

[46:58] Here it's highlighted also the JSON file created for this pipeline. You can see that it's using the colorization using the TIFF inside the folder, it's taking the LAS file as input, it's using the filter reprojection — so from in-SRS it's going to out-SRS — and then it's processing to a new file called 196_processed. Once it's finished, the application will reload here, and we have a new file called "processed". Here we can select this because now we want to work with this for our 3D tiles, and we can create the preview sample. Now we can see we have the same point cloud but it's using the ortho photo and applied the colorization. We cannot see the datum shift here, but that has changed too.

[47:24] Now with this we can not use the process data but instead skip to the next step, that is the tiling options. Here we have a few options: one for the SRS number, it wants just the authority number — here we can use the one that we detected before, the 26985. And then there is a geometric factor that is used to adjust the geometric error. This one for example we are using a 0.15, but this needs to be adjusted based on the use case.

[47:24] When we have this done we can create a tileset. Here it will initialize a new process. In this case it's using another library — as you can see we are using different libraries based on the input data. In this case we're using the py3dtiles library, a Python library, as a command line behind that is running. Here we have the feedback of the current state. Let's wait a few seconds. Here we can see that the logging here is taking information, some of the information for the backend, just to have a quick idea on what's happening behind.

[48:20] Hey Stefano, real quick while we're waiting on that — I do want to emphasize, if anybody has any questions go ahead and post those to the Q&A section, it should be at the bottom of your Zoom window and we'll be happy to answer those. We'll go through those at the end of the session.

[49:18] Now that it's completed we have the tileset review as we had before. We can click on this and get the view of the point cloud. One thing to mention: if the point cloud contains the classification, this process will keep the classification information inside, and we have a button here to test this — it's going to color by classification, and we can see that. So this is the final 3D Tiles that we generate. We can also debug as before the tiles to see the structure and see if it's optimal for our view. This closes the three processes that we want to present as live review — that is the complete set of these three elements that could represent the digital twin model.

[50:15] Going back to the presentation, just quick on a few pieces of information about the ongoing work. So we have the experimental part for the meshes, that you can create a mesh from point clouds. Here we are using Blender, but it's still an ongoing work. Here are the results that we get. So if you initialize the process from the point cloud to create a mesh, then you can use the lidar that you have inside to test this. It's still not an optimal solution because there are issues on the construction on the vertical stage, and some edits take a while to generate — almost 30 minutes to generate the tileset. So I cannot showcase this today, but it's available there, and within the slide you can follow the steps to cover and complete this use case.

[51:20] For the city of Washington D.C., this sample data, you can preview the data directly using the tileset preview that we saw before. All the tilesets are included in the static tileset folder, so you can copy and host whatever you want, the output. Or there is this option available at the top — you can check the tileset that you want and then show the results inside the MapStore viewer. Here is the result. So you can see that inside the MapStore you can view all the tilesets together.

[52:05] And the MapStore here — we can showcase that it includes some options, for example the ability to increase the size of the points, the style of the points, style of each feature inside, and also query the element. So the information that was inside the shapefile at the end are also inside the 3D model, so we can use that to query but also to apply style specific to elements. Also for the points we can classify based on a value property. Finally we can use the tools that MapStore provides, such as the measurement tool and map views that are not included in the default one. But if you're interested in the project MapStore, we left here some links on the latest releases and on the repo and documentation, so you can take a look also at the project MapStore itself. You can use the output of these processes inside MapStore.

[53:18] Now I let my colleague Georgios... thank you so much Stefano for your presentation. I would like just to take this opportunity to say that we are still actively working on this — as specified by Stefano Bovio, it is not production ready yet, but pretty much already functional. There are some important aspects that we are working on, and one of them is the hardening of point cloud capabilities, point cloud classification capabilities. So for this, I would like to leave the talk to Georgios Pipis, who is actively working on the task, to provide a taste of incoming new features you will see for the Digital Twin Toolbox. Thank you so much.

[54:24] Thank you Tobia, thank you Stefano. Hello from me too, I'm Georgios Pipis, I'm working at GeoSolutions as a software developer. My background is related with web-based GIS development and artificial intelligence, and in this presentation I will present you an investigation that we are conducting for point cloud classification as an ongoing work for the Digital Twin Toolbox.

[54:53] But at first, what is point cloud classification? Point cloud classification is the process of assigning labels to individual points in order to identify and categorize different objects or features in the point cloud. For instance, on this slide, on the left column you can see the original point clouds, while on the right you can see the corresponding classified point clouds. As you can see, the buildings are displayed in red, the vegetation in green, the road network in gray, and the ground in yellow. Each feature is presented in a specific class.

[55:33] Why point cloud classification is important: point cloud classification is a significant part in data interpretation since it accelerates the data analysis process. It provides crucial information about the land cover and land uses. It's important for an algorithm or a system to be aware about the semantic features of the scene — in other words, to know which label or class belongs to which point. Moreover, beyond the 3D urban reconstruction, it can be used in various applications including self-driving cars, inspection, autonomous navigation and so on. But here in this project we focus on urban point cloud classification.

[56:27] Now let's talk about the ways that we have to classify point clouds. The first and easiest but time-consuming method is to classify a point cloud by selecting every feature in the point cloud or dataset manually and assigning it a label, for example a tree or a building. To be more specific, a user is able to classify a point cloud creating the outline of each feature using an external software. Although this manual way is quite time-consuming, it is still used for the training data set generation, because the learning-based algorithms are able to learn using both the original data sets and the corresponding ground truth, which is the assigned labels of the data set features.

[57:24] Developers and computer scientists trying to find a more automatic approach initially tried to automate the point cloud process designing deterministic scripts, which included several rules and statements. For example a rule would be: if you find a feature with this color and this geometric shape, assign it as a tree. However, this approach was not effective in different scenes. Subsequently, with the advent of artificial intelligence, several machine learning algorithms such as support vector machines or random forest, and deep learning architectures such as PointNet, were used on point cloud classification and outperformed the handcrafted algorithms.

[58:16] The general idea of the AI-based algorithms is the use of multiple samples or training data, as called in the deep learning terminology, where as I mentioned above it includes the original data and the corresponding labels or ground truth, in order to learn how to recognize these labels. After the learning process, the AI model should recognize the labels that it has learned in unknown for the model data sets. It's important to note that the efficiency of the AI model is highly dependent on the training data set. To give a simple example: if a model is trained to predict features in an indoor environment such as tables or TV or computers, it will not provide accurate results if it tries to predict outdoor features such as cars or trees.

[59:11] So in our case, we performed several experiments in outdoor environments, testing several AI algorithms including machine learning and deep learning approaches. In this figure, the experimentation plan is presented. Initially we have to prepare the data set in order to have a balanced data set in terms of classes and heterogeneity, and then parameterization is conducted, which is an important part in order to fine-tune the training process and export a refined result. Afterwards we generate the model through the training process, while at the end we have to evaluate the model using unknown for the model data sets. Moreover, if we have generated more than one model, we proceed comparing the old models with the new one.

[1:00:06] And this is a result from a pre-trained model focused on sparsely populated areas including parks and villages, and not on urban scenes, while it was trained in order to recognize the classes ground, buildings, vegetation and vehicles. On the right you can see the prediction of the model in a sparsely populated scene with buildings — with buildings in orange, vegetation in green, cars in yellow and ground in gray. As you can see, the result is quite accurate.

[1:02:42] However, in this slide the model fails to predict a densely urban scene, since it predicts almost all the scene as buildings, because buildings are represented with the orange color. However, this is a reasonable result since this model was trained using sparsely populated areas.

[1:04:31] Thus, we experimented with a model generation focused on densely urban scenes, including several experiments with different data sets, classes, algorithms and parameterization. Here we can see one of our experiments in which we trained the model focused on urban areas using the Washington D.C. open data set, while the classes that were used are vegetation, buildings, ground and water. The parameters were tuned in order to find a balance between the accuracy and the complexity of the model, because we wanted an accurate but also a lightweight model.

[1:04:31] Here we can see two predictions from quite densely urban scenes, with buildings in dark orange, vegetation in light orange and ground in green. The result is much clearer and more accurate than the one by the previous model.

[1:06:16] Also in this slide we can see two sophisticated predictions in sparsely urban areas, with buildings in dark orange, vegetation in light orange, ground in green and water in gray. Again the result is quite accurate.

[1:06:16] And in this slide you can see the predictions of the model in a completely different data set from another city, another country, which is completely unknown for the model, with more sophisticated content, since the point cloud displays an urban area in a smaller scale. On the left you can see the ground truth of the point clouds, and on the right the model prediction with a different color map.

[1:07:53] Also we tested the classification results on the Digital Twin Toolbox, and in this slide, as you can see, the user is able to see the classification results by selecting the classification checkbox on the right panel. So in a future version of the Digital Twin Toolbox, the user will be able to automatically classify point cloud in order to further analyze and process the point cloud. And I think that's all for me, thank you for your attention.

[1:03:47] Thank you so much Georgios. Yes, I'm sorry, I would like to spend a few words on the future work, so stuff we are working on at the moment. In short order — basically not so short, I mean we are talking about significant functionalities, improvements and new capabilities for our Digital Twin Toolbox. The first one is of course the one related to the classification, to the hardening of the classification capabilities of point cloud, including also improvement on the user interface for managing this from the control panel.

[1:04:43] The other stuff really important we would like to work on is effectively the ability to improve — to enhance the ability to convert, to generate meshes from point cloud. Of course the intention is to work on another kind of improvements aimed at effectively enriching and improving the performance of the final 3D tile generated from the Digital Twin Toolbox, like the level of details and the tiling system and stuff like that, that are effectively already working well but that can be improved further. And of course a kind of automation is something that we would like to achieve in the near future, in order to possibly automate what is currently needed to be done manually entirely through the user interface or from command line. That's basically all.

[1:06:16] Before switching to the Q&A, I would like to also take the opportunity to thank the Municipality of Genova and Florence, who contributed basically during last year also in the realization of the Digital Twin Toolbox, or at least part of its functionalities, as well as many other MapStore capabilities for 3D. Regarding the Digital Twin Toolbox, you can see here some online resources — we put on the slides some useful links. So for sure the link to the project hosted on GitHub, where we have recently released a pre-release with the current functionalities that you have seen during this webinar, as well as a Wiki page with a good description of available functionalities, configuration properties usable from the control panel, and the concept behind, as well as some tutorials using the same data you have seen in the webinar today, that you can follow also later on. So that's basically all. Ryan, I think we can switch to the Q&A session.

[1:07:56] Great, thanks. We have some questions. Let's proceed in order. So: is it possible that the recording and sample data of the webinar will be available after? Yes, basically the material will be available in the wiki for sure. And the recording will be available online, and for sure to everyone registered at the webinar. In the wiki you can find the same tutorial that you saw. If you want to wait for the recording, there are the same processes, and you have the link here with the data set you can download and test it. If I can add real quick — also if you go to GeoSolutions Group on YouTube you'll see the video from today posted there, as well as all our previous videos.

[1:11:12] So let's jump to the other one: can we use different 3D models for different tree types based on the attribute? I think you can — Stefano, you can answer this. Yes, I will try to show. Now I don't have a model here, but you can see the UI. I'm going to open this. I need the information, I'm using MapStore to get information so I can show also this part. Here we have the same data set. Let's assume that we have a property that represents the name of the model. Now, using for example "genus_name" — it will not work here because I don't have enough, but to show you that it's looking, I can use genus_name plus ".glb", so it's looking now in the folder. If I apply, it's not able because it's not finding the name — so the name of that value does not exist. So it's possible. Let me remove for a moment. So the name must be something inside the property, because it does not exist, these properties, and it's not possible to find now. But if it's included inside the data it's possible to use that and get different models. So you need to have a field that has the model value inside.

[1:11:26] Next question. Sorry — so, hello: is there a way to add WMTS styles from GeoServer to GeoNode using manage.py updatelayers? It's only adding WFS layer at the moment. This one... unfortunately now I don't have this information because it's really specific to GeoNode side. And in any case, consider — even if we cannot provide all information now, since some of them may require some more time to answer — consider that you can use the official channels, GitHub opening issues and things like that for your questions.

[1:12:32] Thank you so much. I want to go back a moment, because before I wrote the wrong name here for the trees. If you get the correct one, because it was upper case not lower case — if you get the correct one, it's looking inside for the name of the properties dot-glb, but these are not included in the static. So if you add a model for each value that you want to create, and you associate it to a point like a category, you can use this — we look and create name of the property plus a string that is ".glb" and add a new model inside the glb folder. Just to complete the answer.

[1:13:22] Thank you so much Stefano. The other question: hello, thank you very much for the presentation. I would like to ask: is there a way one can attach metadata on the 3D Tiles using the toolbox? I will say the answer probably is no — I don't know if there is some trick for this. Stefano? Right now, probably not aware. Right now the only information that we maintain from shapefile is the properties of each feature, the native properties they have. And from the point cloud, the classification if it's included.

[1:14:15] Second question of the same participant: could you provide a way to use the 3D Tiles on GeoNode 4.3 or MapStore, like a 3D Tile server? We — I mean, 3D Tiles are already supported in MapStore for visualization purposes. So as a client of 3D Tiles for visualizing, you can visualize them in MapStore. We are working on including 3D Tiles support in GeoNode 2 — it will be available in the next MapStore release.

[1:14:55] The next question: do you tile large surface point cloud data in a manner similar to 3D Tiles? If so, what format is used, and are there any open-source tools available for tiling? I don't know if you want to answer this, Stefano. So for larger surface point cloud data — yeah, the approach is always to have piled data because it's difficult to manage, also to work in parallel with multiple piles, it's easier. But at the moment we tested just LAS and LAZ format. And the tools that we tried to split data was PDAL — PDAL contains also the possibility to tile data, so we use that to make some tests.

[1:15:59] There is effectively — sorry, also this part has to be mentioned — there is this ongoing work on the automation and including also batch processing. Now you saw a focus on a single element at a time, but the idea is that this becomes like a tuning of properties for a part of a bigger model that then could be automated in a batch process. So the way that we split for the moment in our previous test was PDAL for splitting and using LAS or LAZ format.

[1:16:35] So, in urban digital twin examples using open-source tools, the focus has predominantly been on representing structures using ellipsoidal height. However, is there a method to display this data set above the terrain surface — specifically, is there a clamp-to-ground function available, or are there any workarounds to achieve this? I will answer that. That capability is provided on the MapStore side. One thing, please — I think it's related to 3D Tiles, okay. Probably it's not for some vector data. If it's related to 3D Tiles, if you're talking about like a GeoTIFF that represents a terrain and then clamp the value and then create the point cloud — the point cloud, the 3D Tiles at the moment in the pipeline there's no this. So you need to provide a ready shapefile that has the correct Z that you expect, that has surface, because the process here is just converting data to then be a 3D Tile.

[1:17:35] On the point cloud side, we included the possibility to use a geoid to shift the vertical datum, but that's just the only part. We don't have an option to say "get this terrain and use that at the moment" and use that to adjust the position of, for example, a shapefile that you can include. But it could be something that we can think on for improvement.

[1:18:30] Next question: are there any measure considerations to be taken when creating these kind of 3D layers on the topic of performance — not only for the machine used for processing but mostly taking into account the publishing side, layers in MapStore map which may be viewed by a variety of people with lower and personal computers? Well, there are effectively performance improvements, some of them already available. So tiling pyramid optimization, as I said before, geometric errors — for performing the way the 3D Tiles is visualized. Of course there are also some tricks on the MapStore side in order to improve the performances on the visualization. We are anyway still working on this for certain specific functions and optimization aspects. Of course the 3D still requires from a generic point of view more system resources than the 2D map views.

[1:20:06] I can add something on the generation tile side. We are testing a lot on the options that these open-source libraries are providing that we are using. One thing that we could suggest is to play a bit with the geometric error of the tileset, so decide when you want to display the content exactly. So lower means that you will be far away, the tileset will disappear, and maybe this could improve the performance. And also the features per tile, in particular for the shapefile processing — these two may help you to improve the visualization. It depends a lot on the size of the extension of the data that you want to cover, that probably could change the approach. One of the future works was also to add the possibility to have LODs (levels of detail) but it's not included right now — this could help, having this generalization of 3D geometry could help this process, but it's not yet in our toolbox. But it will be available for sure for the next releases — that's effectively one of the main topics we are working on at the moment.

[1:20:49] So: hello, thank you for the webinar. I'm interested in knowing if it is possible and supported to display 3D Tiles point cloud below the terrain in MapStore. I will simply answer this, then maybe you can add something more. Of course it is. It is something that you may have to pay attention to on the generation of the 3D Tiles — the vertical datum here, applying the vertical datum here, is quite a relevant point. Of course in MapStore there are also other options in the styling panel but also in the layer properties panel where you can configure offset — you can offset basically your data in order to move it vertically. Maybe one thing that was in plan, something that we discussed, is the moment of camera underground. With the map views we already integrated the fact that you can clip the ground so you can place something underground. So that part is there — probably an improvement on the camera would help more the navigation. It is of course possible to see underground data, and it is something we have discussed recently — we should work on improving effectively the way underground data can be navigated. So that's a good improvement for the future.

[1:23:24] Thank you very much, waiting for the next session. Is it lidar point cloud or photogrammetry? Maybe you want to answer this, Stefano. What you see today was an airborne lidar, we took that from the Washington D.C. open data. For the moment the photogrammetry is not implemented — it's one part of the future work. Using this, is it possible to make building models like BIM model? Yeah, we work at something not like 3D Tiles, because when we were talking about BIM I was thinking about the IFC format. For the IFC format we directly added the support on the MapStore side, so you can add a model directly there if you're interested to test it. In the Digital Twin Toolbox right now it's not possible to import this kind of data (IFC), but it could be an interesting improvement, as input data an IFC and convert that into 3D Tiles. So not at the moment, but we can note that as an improvement.

[1:24:56] Thank you. Next question: can you show some examples of the attributes for the building footprints? I'm not sure — if you mean here the lower/upper limits when I'm using it, let me open buildings here just to explain better what happened before. So we have these buildings. Now if you click one of these buildings we have information of each of this — the mean Z, max Z was inside each feature. So when we were applying here attributes — so mean Z, sorry, lower/upper by max — the Z is an expression, for example multiply by 10 and then apply, we are modifying the properties. So here is an expression, this value is per each and is an attribute of the buildings. So we are using this.

[1:25:39] Thank you. "Are they created — will it be with respect to geodetic datum?" It's difficult to answer to this question because right now we are using a geodetic datum, the vertical D shift that we saw before is using a global datum. Most of these lidar sometimes come from local datum, that is also difficult to access. I think if you get the lidar already in ellipsoidal, that should be P — that should work right away, you don't need to pre-process that. If you want then to convert with the geoid you will need to find the most precise geoid to apply the conversion. So it depends a lot on that part.

[1:27:14] Thank you. The next question: if we have two different data of the same location representing the same location from different time periods, is it possible to overlay that to update the digital twin? Well, it's like to create two models, 3D Tiles models, and include them in a viewer like MapStore. Yes, effectively the styling allows you also to — I don't know if it's more like a visualization what you're referring to — because the styling itself allows to change also the opacity. So if you want to have a comparison you can change the opacity of the element and it can work.

[1:28:06] Okay, thanks for sharing your knowledge. The question is: are you defining digital twins as 3D models? What approaches will you use for syncing virtual world and physical world? Yeah, that's effectively a good question. Stefano, I think that today we just showed the structure of the digital model, so we can represent that model — so it was more focused on representation rather than on the data itself. So we are thinking about sensor data that should be updated — that's a new webinar probably, that's an open topic basically. Because digital twin is composed from different aspects, not just the model itself. And in this presentation we focused mainly on this part, exactly.

[1:29:06] Thank you so much to both, thank you very much for the presentation and for the answers. Thank you, of course. And thank you to all the participants for joining this webinar for the Digital Twin Toolbox. I think we're done, there are no more questions.

[1:29:30] All right, thank you everyone, thank you very much for attending. Thank you to Tobia, Georgios and Stefano for your expertise and providing us with the demonstration. I do want to emphasize, if you have follow-up questions you can either go through the community support pages for MapStore — not only MapStore but GeoServer, GeoNode as well — and you can also email us at info@geosolutionsgroup.com. Thanks again everyone for joining, stay tuned on our YouTube channel for this and all of our previous webinars, our blog as well, and we look forward to seeing you at the next GeoSolutions webinar. Okay, thank you everyone, bye-bye, stay well.

