Ruby MockInterview 2025-10-12
Source: https://youtu.be/vWcH6g62B-E

[Music]
All right, welcome to this week's Nailing the Tech interview. Um, wasn't planning to do this, but I took off all of last week. I had some stuff going on for my Spanish class and then yeah, Wednesday was just crazy. Um, the weather has been like up and down here lately. So, usually when the weather shifts a lot, it like sends me into a spiral and I like don't know what's going on. Um, I think I think that happens to a lot of people. But today is Sunday, so we I've got something planned for today and then we will do a mock interview. Um, but before we get started, does anyone have any questions about the technical interview, getting prepped, getting started? Any questions at all about that?

I mean for me it seems like there are like I don't know like 20 something or 30 different patterns to go through. So what I've been feeling is like you always uh behind of covering it all right. So I don't know what's the approach to that. Like if I've never went into like the first search and bread first search on purpose, I wouldn't have encountered that in my practice and stuff. So, uh I don't know if you should just try to do a couple of each category known category of type of problem or something like that to have a a more comp a more holistic a more comprehensive training when you go.

For that specifically, I would not worry about that because um breath first and depth first are usually related to binary trees or trees and graphs. Um and that is not in mod 2. So those patterns are not going to be used for the tech technical interview. Now after the technical interview, if you're preparing preparing for the job hunt and you want to take on practicing that, that's totally fine. Um, I know that that practice is where you mostly get practice with like recursion, but to be completely candid about the technical interview process at this phase for mod 2. If I'm going to give you a recursion problem, it's not going to be like the standard recursion problem. It's going to be like you could do it in a st a normal way or you could write it recursively. And I would be asking you to write it recursively. I wouldn't be giving you a problem that could only be solved by recursion because I haven't found one that's on the easy level that is also a topic that's covered in mod 2. So if I do find one that will change and I'll update I'll make that update here. But um yeah.

>> Yeah. I was asking like I mean I was also thinking when you're going in the job hunt you know like they can't throw you anything right. So I figure you should have exposure of all kinds of patterns type of problem. So it seems like it's a very big body of knowledge to to cover. So

>> yes it does. And I will tell you that that gets easier because we can break that down into two pieces. There's everything that you learn in mod 2 which are just like the building blocks, right? I talk about this all the time. Most of the problems can be broken down into a brute force solution using just you know list dictionaries um everything else in mod 2 link lists 2D arrays functions recursion stacks and cues I think that's that might be all that um but everything can kind of be boiled down to that at like a brute force level at the very least and typically you can expand it even to the most optimized solutions using just what you've learned in Matu. The one deviation from that is like trees and grass. That's the only deviation. So um because it's not taught in Matu, but the trees and graphs can also be worked down to like a brute force from Matu concepts in general. I think I would say that. Um but not maybe not all of them. Maybe not all of them unless you're like No, I don't know. I well okay I won't I won't har like harp on that for too long because I honestly haven't worked on too many of them. I've worked on a few of them and most of them can be broken down into Matu concepts but that's Matu concepts and then there's like the patterns right which is like the sliding window two pointer um greedy linear programming dynamic programming uh any of the other numerous kinds of like patterns like you said breath breath search first and depth search first patterns and for those for the job hunt. There aren't actually that many. That might actually be like the full list plus plus or minus two more. Um and for that I think it's just the process of like even just going to le code and saying tree and graph related leak code problems. Give me the whole list. Go through them one by one. Sliding window leak code problems. Someone has made a sliding window problem list that you can use. It has easy, has medium, has hard problems. Two pointers, leak code, two po two pointer problems. Someone's made a problem list that has easy, medium, um, and hard problems. So, you can do it that way.

For the job hunt, I don't think you need to worry about those kinds of patterns for the joy of coding technical interview. But for the job hunt, if you want to practice those, that's probably one of the better ways to do it. Um, and they're really I mean it seems like it's a lot of information because you don't know what you need to know, but I think that's really kind of it. It's just those couple of patterns that that we kind of talk about every once in a while.

Yeah, it feels when I was practicing this couple of weeks, it feels like I was just, you know, back in college studying for a final, you know, that it's so much information during the semester and you're trying to, you know, categorize in the chapters of the textbook and which which to remember and blah blah blah. So, yeah. Anyways, sorry,

>> but don't get don't get hung up on the the pattern pieces for where you are right now. I would say that's that's something you come back to when you're like really diving into the job hunt and ideally once you've been in the internship for a while and you're like really really comfortable with all sorts of kinds of codes and code problems.

>> All right. Thanks.

>> All right. Well, we're kind of already running down the clock, but I think we'll be okay. Let's see. If I want to do the mock interview and give everyone at least 20ish minutes, that means I've got about Okay, we're going to speedun through this. I do want to do something special today because it comes up kind of often and I I've never really talked about the specific things that I might do in this case. So, I want to do that. All right, share my screen.

So, this is a problem we kind of talked about a few weeks ago, group anagrams. Um, we never went over like the answers for it or like the solutions for it, but it was similar to one that we had gone over, which was valid anagrams.

So valid anagrams was an easy problem where you're given two strings like this and like this or like this and like this and you have to determine if they are anagrams of each other meaning all the exact same letters are in equal number of equal count of each number and that they can be arranged to form the same words with no extra characters. And we talked about this problem quite in depth. We looked at an O of N solution. We looked at a second version of that O o solution option two there. We looked at a in log of solution using sort. The ON solution was using a dictionary and then an Oven squared solution um just literally comparing letter by letter between the two and their counts. So we had talked about a lot of different ways to compare exactly two strings to see if they were anagrams of each other. And then we briefly discussed group anagrams which is the medium problem. So it took it to the next level of saying okay now you have to compare an array of strings and determine which of them are anagrams of each other and which of them are not and group them by anagram brackets. So these three strings are all present in here and they are all anagrams of each other. These two strings are both present in this list and they are anagrams of each other and this one is present and it is not an anagram of anything else but itself but we're still including it. So that by the end all of these have been evaluated and they've been either grouped or put into a group of one and then we're returning those groups.

They also have some other stuff in here. So if we were looking at this problem just again from a highle pseudo code. I'm going to do a couple of things here. We're given oop sorry I got some stuff on my keyboard real quick. Okay, given strings, which is a list of strings that may or may not be anagrams. And some points that we want to include like I just mentioned is that even if even if a string doesn't have any other anagram pairs, we still returning it.

And then quickly for the return statement, we are returning this nasty thing here. So we're returning a 2D array aka a nested array where the outer array is the list of anagram groups. And the inner array are all the strings well all strings all strings that are anagrams of each each other.

Um so just kind of like the simp the the typical steps that we take to outline a problem. Pulling out the info that we just kind of went over quickly and also pulling out the return. What is the return type? what is it going to look like? And then just for clarity sake, I will add that return statement to not get any errors. And then if we look at this problem a little bit more, they also share some other stuff here. So if we get an empty string list, we are still returning a nested empty string list. So that is important to call out as well. So even if string list is empty return 2D array with empty string and that's kind of related to this is like no matter what is given to us we are returning something in the form of a 2D array and then as always we look at the constraints make sure there's anything in there or nothing in there that's going to affect our code so We're expecting our initial input string list to be a length between 1 to like 10,000, which isn't horrible. And strings i.length. So the length of the string inside. So each of these is going to be a string length between 0 and 100. And also string I consists of lowercase English letters. So, it's pretty much set up exactly like this where this list can be about 10,000 strings long and each string can be up to 100 characters. So, I don't think that's going to affect our code too much. Um, but it's good to know that.

So, here's what I wanted to cover today. If we get to this point and then you ask yourself now what, right? Like maybe I haven't seen valid anagram. So, what do I do here? I have to find an anagram. I first have to know what an anagram is and then I have to determine if there are any shared anagrams among them and I have to figure out how to group them into a list and buckets and then I have to return that 2D array. So there's a lot of steps there and usually what we would do is we would break that down even further. We'd spend some time discussing it in pseudo code. You know step one, step two, yada yada yada. So maybe you've done that and then your next step is you start writing some code. And here is what I wanted to talk about today is the at the point in which you get stuck maybe you've gotten at least the twothirds of the test cases running like I suggest um I don't I don't my recommendation is that if you are trying to get something working and you can't get to at least twothirds of the test cases passing before you look up a solution. Um, but if you're completely completely stuck and you don't know where to go, take a day, come back to it later. And then if at that point you still can't do it and you want to look up the solution, that's fine.

But I've never really discussed exactly what my process is. Once I've looked up the solution, we talked a little bit about it. I recommend to try and understand the solution, come back to it a few days later, a week later, and try and do it again from scratch. just knowing how the problem works, how the solution works, so on and so forth. But I wanted to talk today about what that would look like. So if we just started off with our our general outline of the problem, right? And maybe I had some code here, but I didn't get it working. So I'm just going to either clear that out completely or just put it in a comment block and set it off to the side. And then I find a solution online somewhere. And so I just kind of paste that in to see what it is.

So I run it and we see that it works. So we know that this would be a solution. Now I'm not going to submit it yet because this isn't code that I wrote, right? So I don't want to submit it against all the test cases. Maybe I want to check that it does pass all of them. But if I'm looking up solutions online and this is what I get and it passes all of these test cases, I feel pretty confident that that it's probably going to pass all the rest of them as well.

Now, if we if you are working on a medium problem, this one does have like an easy equivalent, right? This one is where you're doing that anagram logic checking. But if you're not sure how to find the easy complement to your medium problem, then maybe you just jump to the solution. So what do we do at this point? And this is where I would recommend making sure that you understand the solution, right? So if we just kind of read through it, we can kind of see what it's doing. Um, but more than that, I think what's good is to write out how this code actually works but in pseudo code language. So that is what I wanted to showcase today is that we have this solution, it is running. So how do I make sure that I understand it? So first I'm just going to skim through. We have anagram table which is a dictionary. So we're initializing a dictionary and then this is our input up here strings. So we know what that looks like. I can visualize that. I don't need to run any prints on that. And we're saying for string in that. So we're looking at each string in our strings list. And then we're creating a temp variable called sorted string which is taking that string and sorting it. So we have the sorted version of that string.

And maybe I just want to see what that looks like. So I'll add in a print statement. So did string. Or if I just wasn't clear what that line was doing, I could do that. and we're seeing okay so for each letter so eat it is putting that in alphabetical order t putting it in alphabetical order tan same thing so all of them are sorted into alphabetical order okay great so I understand that line and then we're saying if the sorted string is not in our dictionary meaning that there is no key for this sorted string then we are going to okay we're going to create an empty array for the key value of our sorted string. So just to visualize that for myself because I need to if I was looking at the what's going on which where my bracket there they are. Okay. So this is my dictionary. If I'm looking at this first string here eat and then it gets sorted. So it becomes a t. So our dictionary is empty. So sorted string is not going to be in anagram table. So we're saying anagram table at sorted string. So that's going to be a key. So key well I'll I'll write it out how it actually would look a t. So our key and then our value is just going to be that empty array. And then the same thing for the next one. We're getting t which would be the same thing. So I'm just going to keep moving. And then ant. So if this Ant would not be in our dictionary yet. So then we would add that one there as well. Ant would be an empty.

So okay. So that's this piece. That's what that one's doing. And then we get down to this next line. Anagram table. So after we've created initialized the key with an empty array value then we are saying at that same key that we just added we are appending string. Now string in this case should be our original unsorted string. So for the first one we would append eat and then we get to the next one which is t. T is in our anagram table or at least AET is. So we're not going to run this code but we will run this code which is anagram table at the AET key and we'll append string which would be t.

So now I'm kind of getting an idea of what this code is doing. And then at the end this last line we're returning list anagram table.values. So I maybe don't know what that means. So let's see what would anagram how is it turning that into a list. I guess maybe I should actually uh pull that out the for loop. Excuse me. in my chat participants. Forgot to open those. Okay, so that returns dictionary values. So it actually returns it as a list here, but it has it kind of in this weird object wrapper. So it's telling me that I have this group and this group and this group group here. So it looks like it is all of these dictionaries that we've made but without their key values, the sorted string key values, which is what we want, right? We want the grouped anagram original strings but not these sorted strings that we're using for the dictionary keys. So then they're casting that as a list because this is the right form. It's a nested a nested list, a 2D array, but it's kind of wrapped as like a string print out of a dictionary. So, they're doing this list type conversion thing there to convert it into this. And if I wasn't sure how they were doing that, maybe I would Google what does the list function do.

Okay, so I have an idea of what the code is doing and what I would recommend at that point. Now that I've added my print statements, I know what's kind of going on. So, I'm going to move that out of my my code way here. And I'm going to write this again as if it were pseudo code. As if this was my solution all along, but that I'm writing the pseudo code for it for the first time before I had written it. If that makes any sense. So I'm going to pretend for the moment for the sake of the understanding the solution that I had written this code and now I'm going backwards a step and saying I'm writing the pseudo code for the code that I wrote even though I didn't write the code. So I would create a dictionary to store key value pairs for anagram groups because that's what we're doing with the anagram table. I will use a sorted string as the key value and use the key value to compare to other sorted strings.

And if you remember from our easy version of the problem, that was one of the things that we did as well. more or less. We compared Yeah, we sorted both of the strings and compared if they were equal because that was an easy way to see if the two strings were anagrams. If we sort them in alphabetical order and they have an exact match, then that means that they are anagrams of each other. So that's kind of the same idea here, but we're implementing it in a different way. So the inner array, no, that's not what I wanted to say. Where is this? Okay. Yeah. So I will use the sorted string as the key values key as the key and use the key to compare to other sorted strings.

And then this is where we get into the for loop logic. So for loop to go through all strings in the input list and I'm actually going to move that down to here. I'll use a sorted string as key and compare to other sorted strings. If the sorted string doesn't exist in the dictionary, add it. Otherwise, add the unaltered string. as a value to the dictionary using maybe append because that's what they said using append because it's a list a list. All right. What else is our code doing over here? So check if the string is in the dictionary. Yep. And then the last thing we're going to do is once we have that dictionary completed, so we've made the dictionary of all of the anagram groupings, convert the dictionary groups back into a 2D 2D array of anagram groups and return turn the nested. All right. Okay.

So, that's what my pseudo code might look like for this jumbling of code here. And I'm just going to read through again to make sure that makes sense. So, create a dictionary to store key value pairs for anagram groups uh for loop to go through all the strings in the input list. I will use a sorted string as the key and use the key to compare to maybe future future sorted strings. If the sorted string doesn't exist in the dictionary, add it. Otherwise, add it as a key as a key. Yeah. Add the unalter string as a value to the dictionary value list, I might say, using append. Yeah. And then convert the dictionary groups back into a TD 2D array of anagram groups and return the nested array.

So that is pretty similar to what this is doing here, I think. And then I would delete this entirely and forget about it, not reference it, not think about it. I have my pseudo code outline of what it's doing. And maybe I would write this more in detail than than this because I'm, you know, trying to go a little bit quicker. Um, but I have my like pseudo code outline of what the code from the solution that I looked up is doing. So now I'm no longer relying on code that I didn't write. I have taken the solution that was that I looked up and I've translated it into my own words in my own language. How I understand the solution is working. I've stepped through it. I've made some print statements. I've tried to visualize the data structure to make sure I know what's happening at each step in the code. and I translated it into a pseudo code game plan. So now at this point I think you could dive right into this next step of take your pseudo code and then try and write it out in code again. Um and maybe it looks the exact same as the code from before. Maybe it looks a little bit different. Maybe you struggle with some of the parts like getting the sorted string or adding it to the dictionary and instead of going back to that solution, you have to say, okay, how to, you know, add to dictionary in Python. That might be something I have to look up as I'm going through it because I maybe didn't have that knowledge or I had forgotten how to do that step. Same things that you might do when you're in your practice.

And that is how I would approach working on this. And then if you were to write this out, I for this for this little demonstration, I had practiced doing this myself and I came up with mostly the same code, but I just wanted to show you. I intentionally tried to make it a little different obviously. Um, but this is what I had come up with. So, so for string and strings, we're still doing Oh, I need to add that. I kind of put it out of the way in my little sample code up here.

So, create a dictionary to store the key value pairs. And then we're using a for loop to go through all the strings. Yep. And then I'm using a sorted string as the key to compare for future sorted. So here I'm saying I'm making a copy of that string. Sorted string. And then this is something that came up during me trying to retype out the solution. So if you just use the sorted function which is a built-in Python method. Oh, I forgot to hit uh forgot to uncomment this. Then what you see is that it will actually return a list. And so I wasn't actually expecting that the first time I looked at that. So I'm like, "Oh, why am I getting a list of It's still in alphabetical order. You can see that. But it's a list." And so if you look up Python sorted method, it tells you the sorted function returns a sorted list of an iterable object. So what it's doing is that it's taking the string that I gave it eat and it is sorting it but then it's returning it as an array or a list because there isn't any like natural python function or library method for sorting a string you can use I mean there are plenty of sorted meth sorting methods or sorting like uh algorithms but Python for built-in methods for a string there's no like sort feature

So then at that point I'm saying, okay, I needed to look up how do I turn a list back into a string? And then you might find a nice Stack Overflow that tells you to use the join method. So Python join method to make sure that I understand how that works and what that's doing. So the join method is a string method that creates a new string by concatenating all elements of an iterable object like a list separated by a specific string separator. So the join is taking my list and turning it back into a string um pretty pretty naturally. It it it can expect a list and so it will just turn that right back into a string.

So then if I were to print that out again, I would get what I'm expecting. Print copy and string spelling mistake string. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that's one. Okay, cool. So, I have the copy that is sorted and I still have the original unaltered string because I remember in my pseudo code that I'm going to need that. So, I have all of the strings there unsorted and sorted. So then for my approach I remember that I have to determine so I have to if the sorted string doesn't exist in the dictionary add it as a key. So if my sorted string is in anagrams I'm going to append the unaltered string add the unaltered string to to as a value to the dictionary using append. Yep. Otherwise, I'm going to initialize it with that same string. So, if it exists, if the key, the sorted key already exists, I'm just going to add my string to that list. So, for the first time, we're creating we we pass in eat. Eat does not exist in anagrams or a doesn't exist in anagrams. So anagrams at a t equals an array containing eat and then we pass in t which you can see will be an anagram because it sorted value does match. So aet is an anagrams. So we're just going to go ahead and append our string unaltered string t directly to that group.

So it's shaping up to be very similar to the previous code that we looked at. But it is a little bit different, right? because I wrote my pseudo code and the way that I wrote my pseudo code wasn't syntax perfect to the solution that I looked up. It's a little bit quirky. It's a little bit different. So, when I'm going back and interpreting my pseudo code, I can still get a working solution, but my approach might be different because I'm doing things in a different way based on how I understood the problem when I wrote my pseudo code. And then we get to the final line here of this all works perfectly. I printed it out. I've made sure that at the end anagrams, my little dictionary that I've made does match what I'm expecting it to do. So, we have all of our strings that we made to make our dictionary. And then I'm seeing, okay, great. Here's my AET, and these are all the strings that are anagrams using that. Here's a t and here are all the anagrams string strings that are anagrams using that. And then bat, which is all by itself.

So great, I've figured out how to make my dictionary. I know it works. I know it looks like how it's supposed to look like. We want to return this basically. So how do I change my dictionary back into this? That's my last step here is convert the dictionary groups back into my 2D array. Now they use the list the list method, but maybe it's been a few days and I don't remember how they did that. So I'm going to do it the oldfashioned way. I'm going to create an empty list and I'm going to go through all of the key value pairs in my dictionary and for each key I'm just going to directly add that whole value to this list. So, I'll add my list as a value to this other list. And then I'll add this list as a value to this list. And then I'll add this list as a value to this list. And then I end up with my nice final formatted 2D array. And then I make sure that that passes the test cases and then I can submit that and it runs everything.

So in the end, I've still broken down the original solution. I took a look at it. I made sure I understood it even though it wasn't code that I came up with. I made sure how each part worked and I stepped through it. I added some debugging steps to make sure I understood what was happening at each part each part of the code. I rewrote the pseudo code for it in my own words. I took some time away. Maybe I took a day. Maybe I took a few days. And then I came back and I tried to write the code myself from scratch using only my pseudo code that I wrote, not the original solution that I looked up.

And you're going to get stuck doing that probably in this case, you might get stuck at this step, at this step, and even again at that step. So I if I had gotten stuck in all of those three places, that's one thing that I can look up. So instead of looking up an entire solution to reference for how do I write this part of the code, I'm only looking up the part that I'm stuck at. So, I'm stuck at how do I turn my array of sorted strings back into a string? My list of my list of my sorted list of characters back into a string. So, I can look that up, make sure that works. And then I'm looking up how do I add my string as a key to a dictionary? Look that up, make sure that works. And then finally, how do I traverse a dictionary to get the key value pairs so that I can append them to a list? And that's a third thing that I might look up. So, I'm only looking up those key things along the way while I'm still interpreting my pseudo code and writing the code myself.

Okay, that took a little bit longer than I wanted to, but I hope that makes sense. This would be my typical process for looking up a solution and working with a solution that I had not written if I got stuck on a code on on a problem. So, I'm not going to do this for every problem because this is again I try to limit this to where problems that I either get stuck on after trying over several different days with breaks in between or after I've gotten at least 2/3 of the test cases passing but I can't get the final third or the final half. And so, I'm doing my best to get the brute force approach working. And if I can't do that, then I'll look up the solution. And though this is my approach when I have to look up a solution in those rare cases um or maybe not so rare cases depending on which medium problem I'm looking at. So I wanted to go over this whole process because I don't think I've ever explicitly talked about what my process is for looking through solutions to problems. Um but I hope that that makes sense and I hope that helps. Does anyone have any questions about about anything that I've done today?

Can you summarize the process just to have it clear?

>> Yes. Okay. So, if I've gotten to the point where I'm looking up a solution, I'm going to find that solution. Maybe I'm using the solutions tab over here to see what my peers have done or maybe I'm googling the solution online and seeing does anyone have a solution to this leak code problem. I'm pasting it in directly, running it to make sure it passes the sample test cases. If it passes my sample test cases, then I'm going to break down that solution that was written by someone else into parts to make sure I understand it. So I'm going to step through each line of code, try and summarize it in my own words, add some print statements or debug statements if I don't understand it, and once I understand how that solution works, that other person's coded solution works, then I'm going to write my own pseudo code for it. So I'm going to take it line by line and look at what is going on at this part of the code. How would I write that in my own words? What's happening here? I'm not trying to be exact about it. I'm not trying to say line three creates this method using a join method that sorts it to a string. I'm just kind of summarizing it generally how I would normally write my pseudo code. And so for my pseudo code, I'm just saying I'm guarding a a for loop. I'm creating a sorted string and adding it to a dictionary. I'm making sure it exists in the dictionary. yada yada yada. Once I have my pseudo code, I'm taking a break. Whether it's going to be a day, a few days, maybe a week, there will be no code when I come back. It will only be my pseudo code. So after I come back from my break, having having written that pseudo code, all that will be in the editor will be that pseudo code. And then I'm going to try and rewrite the solution based off the pseudo code that I wrote. Take it step by step. look up look up any issues that I have, make sure I can get around them, debug my errors, um, and keep going until I get a working solution as if I was approaching this problem for the first time, but had already written out the pseudo code for it. And then keep going until I get my solution. And I won't reference that original solution at all, like ever again, ideally.

>> Thank you. And before going through this process, before looking at looking up a solution, um how long you should basically bang your head against the wall before going for the solution.

So it depends on the problem. What I usually like to say, especially for a medium problem, if I've spent like if I wrote up some pseudo code for it and I had a plan, but it's either not working or I can't get enough of the test cases passing, maybe I'm only getting a third of the test cases passing. Um, if that, I will spend about an hour on it, maybe a little more, but not generally more than that. And then I'll come back either the next day or two days from now. I'll just let it sit and marinade. And then usually when I come back the second time, things go a lot smoother. Um, so maybe I get most of the test cases passing or even all of the test cases passing. But in the case that I can't get all of the test cases passing and I'm only getting like twothirds of it, at that point again, if I'm getting up to the 2/3 limit and I'm made a bunch of confident successful attempts from there, usually again that doesn't take much longer. Um, then I will look up the solution if I'm getting stuck there. I guess I will go until I'm getting the two/3 test cases running and then I will spend at least another 10 20 minutes on that trying to get all of the test cases running right. I wouldn't spend more than 20 30 minutes on a medium problem trying to get the last final third. I probably wouldn't even spend more than 10 minutes trying to get the final third working if it's not working because that means that there's like a flaw in my approach in my understanding of the problem. I might go back and re-review the problem. We've talked about that before. If I have most of my test cases working, but I can't get the final third, I'll take a break and I'll read through the problem again, make sure I didn't miss any assumptions, look at all of the pieces. I'll go back to the constraints to see if I miss any elements there that might be holding me back. I'll do a complete deep dive back into the problem and if I don't learn anything from there or I do learn something but I can't get it working at that point I would then look up the solution.

>> Okay. So in total it's like 1 hour and 30 minutes total of

>> across multiple days. I would I would never look up the solution day one.

>> Okay. But total time of trying is an hour and 30 minutes spread to different days or

>> Yes. Yes. For me, that's for me.

>> If you're just getting started, it's probably going to take a little bit more than that, right? But for for you, I would say that's probably still a general timeline to stick to. You don't want to spend too much time. But I think when people are first getting started, like they might spend an hour on an easy problem. So it would it would be that process but for an easy problem for medium problem it might be a little bit longer.

>> Okay. And it you just have to stop for the day because you're already overloaded. That's the reason

>> you've hit everything that you can do for the day. You know, you've thought through it as much as you can. You don't need to keep bashing your head over the problem. You need to refresh and you need a change of environment, a change of scenery. Go for a walk, come back, get some some new insight.

>> Yeah. Because I mean I found out that at that point you get like into an infinite loop in your head of the same thing.

>> Yeah.

>> So yeah.

>> Yeah. I've I've worked on a problem and couldn't even get like the sample test cases working after like an hour and got really really frustrated with it. decided to go on a little nature walk, spent about 30 minutes to an hour on a nature walk, came back, knocked the problem out of the park in 20 minutes, like like it was nothing. So, that is absolutely possible to do.

>> Or you might come back and you try it again and you still don't get anywhere. So, then you just take a break for the day, come back a few days later.

>> Yeah.

>> Okay. Thanks.

>> Any other questions?

Okay. Well, uh, we ran we ran out of time. I thought I was going to give us time to do a mock interview, but, uh, we ran out of time. So,

>> Oh, sorry. Sorry for asking so much, but

>> No, I mean, that's fine. I I wanted to cover this topic. So if you have any questions about that that's great

>> because sometime you get lost about what what would be the best methodology to actually get through your own issues you know so

>> exactly

>> feel like it's necessary to ask those

>> and I did kind of speedrun through it like again I would spend on the original solution I look up I would spend a good amount of time adding print statements making sure I understand each line when I'm rewriting it later from just the pseudo code I'm going to do my usual proc process that I show week to week where I write a for loop. I print print out that for loop. Make sure everything works. I add a new variable or some new logic. I add a print statement to test that new variable or that new logic. I do some condition, some stuff with a data structure. I add a print statement to make sure that that data structure is working the way that I'm expecting it to work. So on and so forth. Like it's still the very step-by-step process with the pseudo code. But I didn't spend too much time showing that because I was trying to uh race the clock there.

>> Yeah.

>> Yeah. Just um just to let you know the that's the first time I've actually seen a database values being converted back to a list. So that was um

>> yeah dictionary

>> for me. So um I didn't know I didn't know what it looked like. So that's the first time I've seen something like that. So thank you for showing that. Um because I know I've drawn blanks. I for me I've started with the pseudo code identifying areas like what you're doing is breaking it down into code and generate the code gener uh look at the pseudo code generate the code and if I have a problem with it then start start looking up the how to do that. So the the database to into a list was something um I always drew a blank on. So thank you for sharing that. I appreciate that.

>> Yeah. And I think that's something that's easy to get hung up on is how do you check that when you want to add something to a dictionary, usually you have to check if the key exists. So that's something you have to learn. How do I check if a key exists in a dictionary? How do I update a dictionary value? How do I initialize a data? Well, actually, how do I add to a data value? How do I update or how do I initialize a dictionary value? Sorry. and then what are the the methods in the language to iterate through. So that's what it looks like for a key value pair because again it's easy to visualize what a dictionary is because you have your key and your value right so your key colon value

>> but how do you get access to them and so that's where you get the dictionary items method or what we saw in the original solution it was only the values so if I did I could also just do for value in anagrams dov values and that would als also work because then I don't I didn't need the key so I don't have to worry about the key. So I think there's a couple of diff different dictionary methods. So I think it's either keys or I mean we can look that up right now actually. Python dictionary. It's good to get acquainted with those.

So yeah, there's get which we've looked at before. It determines if a key exists and you can add in like a catch case there. So get model and then you can add in a optional if yeah if the key does not exist use this as a return value. So that's a good one because it's a safe way of checking for a key value even if the key doesn't exist. So that's a good one. Items returns the list containing a tupole of each key and value pair. Keys returns only the keys. Values returns only the values. You can pop just like an a list pop item set default. You can update that updates the key value pair. So there's a couple of different methods to get acquainted there.

So you could go through just the keys, you could go through just the values, you go through the key value pairs, you do all sorts of stuff. So it's good to get acquainted with all just like with a list, there's a couple of methods that are typically the most ones commonly used. You get acquainted with those, you use them in a couple of problems.

>> Yeah, thanks for clarifying that.

All right. So, what we'll do is that on Wednesday, we'll probably um I think we'll use that time to do a mock interview there and because we didn't really cover anything today. So, yeah, I think we'll use that space to do a mock interview if we have someone interested. Otherwise, maybe we'll just pull up a random problem and kind of look at it. We'll we'll see how it goes.

>> Any problems you want us to look at?

Um, I think no for this time because I had one that I wanted to use for the mock interview because I thought that we would get to it today. So, I kind of don't want to waste it as homework. Um, but if you try one and you get stuck on it, feel free to bring that to Wednesday as well and we'll just look at a stuck like stuck code or something like that.

>> Okay.

>> All right. Thanks for joining me. We will close out for the day. See you all soon.
